



This is the Sanskrit symbol for Om, the primeval sound of the universe, the basic sound from which all else comes. Om is in every place, mind, and heart.

Often spelled Aum, it is usually spoken almost under the breath and pronounced in the consciousness as well as in the mouth as “Omm....” The small silence at the end is as important as the sound itself.

It is said that the recitation of Om while contemplating the mystical symbol will help to calm even the roaring waves.



CONTENTS



PUBLISHER’S PREFACE

PREFACE TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION

INTRODUCTION


PART 1

Knowing the True Self Within, and Selfless Action

CHAPTER ONE • Arjuna’s Anguish (Arjuna Vishada Yoga)

CHAPTER TWO • The Path of Knowledge (Sankhya Yoga)

CHAPTER THREE • The Path of Action (Karma Yoga)

CHAPTER FOUR • Integrating Knowledge, Action, and Renunciation (Jnana-Karma-Sanyasa Yoga)

CHAPTER FIVE • Contemplating the Goal (Sanyasa Yoga)

CHAPTER SIX • Taming the Mind and Senses (Dhyana Yoga)


PART 2

The Very Nature of God

CHAPTER SEVEN • Both Knowing and Experiencing Divinity (Jnana-Vijnana Yoga)

CHAPTER EIGHT • The Imperishable Godhead (Akshara Brahma Yoga)

CHAPTER NINE • Royal Knowledge and the King of Secrets (Rajavidya Rajaguhya Yoga)

CHAPTER TEN • The Divine Glories (Vibhuti Yoga)

CHAPTER ELEVEN • The Cosmic Vision (Visvarupa Darsana Yoga)

CHAPTER TWELVE • The Path of Love (Bhakti Yoga)


PART 3

Attaining Liberation Now

CHAPTER THIRTEEN • The Field and Its Knower: Distinguishing between Matter and Spirit (Kshetra Kshetrajna Vibhaga Yoga)

CHAPTER FOURTEEN • Going Beyond the Three Forces of Nature (Gunatraya Vibhaga Yoga)

CHAPTER FIFTEEN • Devotion to the Supreme Self (Purushottama Yoga)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN • The Two Destinies: Divine or Degenerate (Daiva-Asura Sampad Vibhaga Yoga)

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN • The Path of Threefold Faith (Sraddha Traya Vibhaga Yoga)

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN • Liberation through Knowing, Acting, and Loving (Moksha Sanyasa Yoga)


EPILOGUE

AFTERWORD

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

ABOUT THE AUTHOR





PUBLISHER’S PREFACE





When Mahatma Gandhi — the “great-souled one,” the leader of India who nonviolently freed his country from British rule — died, a now famous photograph was taken of all his possessions: his simple white cotton piece of clothing, his glasses, his sandals, and his well-worn copy of The Bhagavad Gita. It was a book he read daily, a source of endless inspiration to him.

The Gita is read daily by millions of people in India, as well as throughout the world; it is in the homes of literally hundreds of millions of people, and is considered by a great many to be the finest source of spiritual teaching in the world.

When Jack Hawley presented us with this extraordinary prose version of it, which tells the story so clearly and beautifully, everyone in our company felt as if we had been given a great gift — one we feel blessed to be able to publish and share with the world.

There is endless wisdom and inspiration in these pages. The Gita has proven itself over hundreds of generations to be one of the greatest gifts ever given to humanity, one of the greatest scriptures ever written.

Read it straight through, as a magnificent story filled with great teaching. Or simply open it to any page at random, and ponder the words, applying them to your life experience.

This is more than a book, more than the writings of any mortal man or woman. It is Divine revelation, filled with the words of a vast, illuminated soul — and these words can lead you to a far greater life experience, and even to illumination itself.

Marc Allen



NewWorld Library





PREFACE TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION




LESSONS LEARNED


“The whole and sole purpose of the Bhagavad Gita, the only reason it was originally given to humanity, is to help people rid themselves of their worldly suffering, find true happiness and achieve Self-realization.”



— Sathya Sai Baba



Twenty-five years ago my wife and I were traveling across India’s Deccan plateau in a non-air-conditioned taxi in the middle of summer. Late in the day, wet and wrinkled, we stopped at a modest guesthouse to quench our thirst and lay our heads on a pillow. Thirsting also for something to read, I noticed a lone book, The Bhagavad Gita, resting on the only shelf in the room. I had been introduced to this ancient text some ten years earlier and had read a few memorable excerpts, but the teachings had never gained a foothold in my awareness.

As I flipped through its dog-eared pages, I stopped at chapter seven where Krishna, the heroic Divinity figure of the Gita’s story, begins to describe the very nature of the Divine. I was enthralled and began reading aloud to Louise, explaining that this was “God” talking:



I am Pure Consciousness, the underlying essence of all elements and beings.



I am the innate nature of everything.





In pure water I am the sweet taste.



In the sun and moon I am the radiance.



In the very center of human beings I live as virility and courage.





I am the slight, delicate scent, the sweet fragrance of the earth.



I am the brilliance in both fire and sun, and I am the light of Divinity in all beings.





I am the subtle spirit in spiritual practices that gives them their existence — the love in the devotee, the simple austerity in the ascetic, the sweet sense of charity in the giver.





This narrative on Divinity picks up several times throughout the book, but in those first few words of chapter seven we are plunged pleasantly into what has become a lifelong love affair with the wondrous Bhagavad Gita.

Since that encounter in the guesthouse, I have researched and written three books on the Gita. This one is the basis, the source, the reservoir of practical spiritual knowledge from which the others rise. Over these years we have traveled the world lecturing and doing workshops on the Gita’s teachings.





Five Beguiling Lessons




With the advent of New World Library’s new paperback edition of the book, I would like to share some of things I have learned over the years.

1. I learned that there is a crucial difference between regular and spiritual reading.



This difference makes a big difference. Our everyday reading, which is part and parcel of living and working in the world, is primarily for gaining worldly information. Spiritual reading has loftier purposes — to reposition us beyond the worldly and lead us into spaces the mind could never imagine, to touch the Divine in each of us. We may skim during regular reading, but we need to approach our spiritual reading with a higher awareness.

I once met a young man in a local restaurant in India. His English was good but he had a thick European accent. I found myself leaning a bit closer to make sure I could hear. He told me how much he was enjoying reading and rereading my Bhagavad Gita book.

I asked how he liked the German translation. “Oh,” he said, “I’m reading it in English — and I like reading it in English because it makes me think. If I was reading it in German, I would go through it too fast, like I always do, and then, when finished, I would fool myself that I had understood it. But that would not be true!

“Reading it in English, not my native language, makes me think about every idea and word, and ask myself, ‘Do I truly understand this?’ The extra work puts it deeper inside me, and I end up knowing it better.”

We all zoom through our reading piles as he does. Whether the content is important or not, we click into a mindless, autopilot mode and thus take in a tiny percentage of what we skim. Speeding might be appropriate for most reading jobs, but speed kills spiritual reading. We have to lean a bit nearer to it.

2. I learned that two of the points I made in the earlier edition need to be emphasized.



First, contrary to its title, this book is not a simple “walkthrough.” When the book first came out, I wrote in the Introduction that the stroll may not be bump free. In retrospect, that wasn’t clear enough. The book is written in easy English, but reading it entails positive effort. One reviewer said it’s a book that asks much and gives back so much more. Moving through it is a great exercise for your spirit, and like any exercise, physical or soul based, you emerge in better shape.

Second, when I wrote the how-to-read-it pointers in the Introduction a decade ago, I conveyed the idea that getting the most out of this book is largely a matter of one’s attitude and mood. At that time I sensed the importance of this, but now, having lived with the book in the real world, I know it! One’s frame of mind while reading truly does make a difference. So when you read the Introduction (especially the last two paragraphs on page xxiv), inhale the suggestions — turn your reading into a receptive meditation.

3. I learned that the spiritual journey is the central expedition of your life, and this book may well be the most important reading you ever do. Period.



4. I learned to communicate the Gita’s vastness by narrowing my own focal point.



A few years ago I struggled mightily for days, weeks, trying to write an article on what the Gita’s splendor and utility mean to me. The prospect of composing yet another intellectual analysis or codification of the principles bored me. As I pondered, an ancient voice within me whispered, “Share your love.” The aha doors opened....

I love the Gita’s basic goodness, and how it pushes me beyond merely striving to be a good person, toward becoming my own Divinity within. I love that it provides me with page after page of methods for calling forth that extreme goodness. And I love how it continually reminds me to do that.

I love my inner peacefulness whenever I enter the Gita’s teachings. I love how almost all my anger has been eliminated, and how worldly agitations are largely things of the past for me.

I love the Gita for its depth, its breadth, and mostly its height — the way it pulls me upward. I love it for its humanness as well as its sublimity.

I love the ultra-honesty in the Gita about religion — how it lives in the open space beyond religious dogma and yet embraces a reverence for the scriptural teachings of all faiths.

I love the Gita’s insistence that we consciously live by our own inner truth. I love how it doesn’t compromise an iota on this, how it won’t put up with any excuses where truth is concerned.

I love the Gita’s clarity about how we have to live with the consequences of our actions, good or bad, but with no hint of punishment. I love how it neither excuses nor overlooks humanity’s dark side, and yet doesn’t dwell there. Sanskrit, the precise, spiritual language of the Gita, has no word for damnation.

I love the antiquity of the Gita, appreciating that it precedes by thousands of years the societies we Westerners think of as the cradles of civilization. This isn’t merely “older is better” snobbery. The Bhagavad Gita has passed the persistent tests of countless centuries, and yet it remains the basis for all the spiritual teachings known in the world today.

I love the Gita’s teachings on acceptance — not mere compliance, but acceptance as an overpowering state of mind and way of being, a receptiveness so elevated that one’s life forever soars when touched by the magic of it. This all-embracing acceptance is the most shining facet of love, the very essence of spiritual surrender.

I love the happiness in the Gita and thoroughly appreciate its careful explanation of how to attain real bliss. I also appreciate that it lays out what happiness is not and is so clear about the pitfalls in the way of lasting happiness.

I love that the all-powerful Divinity described in the Gita is loving and nonpunitive.

I love that the Gita looks death (and life) squarely in the eye and offers a straightforward system for not just conquering our fear of death but triumphing over death itself !

Finally, I love the Gita’s emphasis on application rather than airy theology — insisting that putting the teachings into practice will lead to a happier, more graceful life.

5. I learned that there’s an enthralling paradox in all this.



In the final analysis, it’s not about this book, and it’s not even about the brilliant, never-changing principles and teachings of The Bhagavad Gita itself. It’s about you. It’s about you, learning to rid yourself of your worldly suffering and find true happiness. It’s about you, learning to slip quietly into your own True Self Within. The only real destination in life is your inner Divinity. In the end it’s all you have.





INTRODUCTION




WHY THE BHAGAVAD GITA?


“Ancient, but strangely close and familiar. . . . ”





The Gita is an epic mystical poem about life, death, love, and duty from the peoples who settled in the river valleys in southern Asia and developed a sophisticated culture thousands — probably scores of thousands — of years ago. It is a half-inch-thick poem embedded in the middle of a six-inch-thick poem, the Mahabharatha, a literary masterpiece about the heights and depths of the human soul.

The Bhagavad Gita contains the inner essence of India, the moral and spiritual principles found in the very earliest scriptures of this ancient land. One of them, the Rig Veda, is said to be the oldest record of humankind! To read The Bhagavad Gita, therefore, is to reach countless epochs back in time — and yet, as I settled into these cobwebby teachings, they felt strangely close and familiar. It was as if some force could at long last take my hand and walk me down a not-so-quiet path to important and meaningful truths; as if I — this too-worldly Western businessman living behind the fading whitewashed walls of an ashram in southern India — could now, finally, be let in on the most profound secrets of humankind.

This ancient tome is not, as one might expect, about withdrawing from life to meditate in some far-off cave. It’s more of a manual to clutch close, a friendly guide for living a more spiritual life today — a more purposeful and fulfilling life even while staying fully active in the world. The Gita is very much about how to remove sorrow and pain from life and thus achieve contentment and serenity, which is a wondrous goal. But even more than that, it’s about the absolute highest prize: liberation and self-realization in this lifetime. It’s not merely about the quest for these lofty things; it’s a detailed map to the treasure itself — a handbook for living a higher, more satisfying existence here, now, in today’s tough and troubling times.

And the Gita is also about how to die, and what happens after.

As I studied the Gita, I found myself so engrossed in this old yet current scripture that I carefully worked through each of the 700 verses (slokas), one by one. I called it a “walkthrough,” and it was not an easy stroll. The Gita’s message is full of profound, sometimes intricate spiritual concepts. Many of the painstaking translations, written by scholars for other scholars, can be almost painfully thorough. And Sanskrit, the early language of the Gita, contains exact terms for spiritual and philosophical concepts that, when put into English, can sound too condensed — like one of those old pay-by-the-word telegrams (“Arrive Noon Tuesday Meet Me”). Important details are missing; you often don’t know what is really being said.

I wanted to understand the book in a way that spoke as directly as possible to my struggles and daily concerns, so I developed a pattern of juggling five or six translations of the Gita on my desk and lap, scratching notations in the margins, checking one against the other, and writing out my own synthesis of each sloka in modern American English. This allowed me to get into the flow of ideas and not interrupt my reading every few words to clarify the meaning of some hard-to-grasp idea. I ended up working my way through thirty-some versions, many over 1,000 pages, several consisting of two or three volumes (one was seventeen volumes).

It wasn’t as onerous or bookish as it sounds because over the years I had already developed a relationship with the Gita. Although my cultural background (as a practical organization consultant from California via upstate New York) is far distant from India, for me the Gita’s teachings were tangible and immediate. For twelve years my wife, Louise, and I had lived about six months each year in a spiritual community in rural India where the culture of the Gita is still a strong part of daily life. I was therefore able to test these teachings on the touchstone of life’s trials as I lived them.

As each day closed, I would read my notes to Louise, who had also grown to love this great work, to see if the day’s writings made sense to another ordinary, interestedWesterner. We looked forward to these nightly sessions, and as we grew to better understand the Gita, we developed an even greater admiration and trust of it.

Dusting off the Gita’s gems of wisdom and adding them to the necklace of our daily living changed us and beautified our lives (and perhaps our immersion in the Gita even saved Louise’s life, as I explain in the Afterword). There is a humility that comes with rediscovering these old pearls that have touched countless millions of souls through many thousands of years. And there is an awe at seeing how germane they are to the problems of today’s world.

The “walkthrough” metaphor contained more than I had envisioned. At first it just felt like a friendly term implying an ease of reading. But as the work progressed, my task became more evident: this needed to be a truly different style of Gita. The traditional way of imparting these ancient truths is to present a short, aphorism-like teaching (a “telegram phrase”), and then explain it through several pages of in-depth “commentary.”

That process is too lumbering for today. This needed to be a livelier Gita,more attuned, a Gita that could be read from cover to cover without backtracking to recall certain words, or sidetracking into companion volumes to find out what it really means. This Gita had to stand on its own two feet, without crutches of any kind. The whole point is to take your time, walk through it from beginning to end, and enjoy the stroll.

Thus I found myself even more intensely juggling the many resource books, making sure that in the end I could stroll easily, and Louise could listen smoothly, with understanding. I had to repeat the meanings of unfamiliar words, and restate several times the explanations of certain ideas that are used quite differently in the Gita than we Westerners use them (the definition of reality, for example). I chose to repeat these clarifications as asides or in parentheses so the reading would continue to flow.

“Clarity and flow” became my mantra as the work developed, but I also had to ensure that it did not turn into just another interesting self-help book — that it retained its very special energy and remained a full-strength, undiluted Gita. I tested the manuscript with several people who are knowledgeable of Sanskrit and the Gita, including professor friends who are not at all shy about giving criticism. Some wrinkled their brows (“just forWesterners?”), but after getting into it they all liked it and offered many suggestions. A few even confessed that they had personally learned much from it. Not one of them found the frequent reminders too repetitious. Indeed, Krishna, the God figure in the Gita, restates the same truths again and again in different contexts and imageries — like a mother repeating lessons to her child.

That’s how it unfolded. In this quite natural way, this new version of The Bhagavad Gita shuffled happily into being—a concise but powerful book that invites ancient but strangely close and familiar ideas into our lives, and gives us new understanding of ancient truths.





Timeless, Pure Truth




To read The Bhagavad Gita is to swing back and forth smoothly between the head and heart, between the worldly and the spiritual, arching between gaining knowledge and applying it in today’s real world. In this swing from humanness to godliness lies the Gita’s secret penetrating power, its ability to lift and move us.



The year is 3141 B.C.E. Arjuna, an esteemed warriorprince at the height of his powers, the greatest man of action of his time, is readying to go into battle. It is a righteous fight to regain a kingdom rightfully his. All his life he has been a courageous, successful achiever, renowned for prowess in combat. But now, on the eve of the biggest clash of his career, an odd thing happens. His hands begin to shake.





Arjuna is in his magnificent war chariot pulled by four white steeds. The chariot driver, Arjuna’s best friend from boyhood, is Krishna, an Avatar, an incarnation of Divinity on earth. Arjuna, who doesn’t really understand Krishna’s Divinity, has directed him to drive the chariot into the center of the plain where the great battle is soon to begin. The opposing armies have gathered on each side.





It is an epic scene: two lone figures parked between the legions of good and evil; masses of soldiers, tents, cook fires, neighing horses, banners snapping in the early-afternoon breeze; the bustle, noises, and smells of pre-battle filling the air.





Arjuna’s eyes scan the opposing forces, pausing on former friends, revered uncles, teachers who taught him his warrior skills. All are bravely making ready for the mutual slaughter. He slumps, breathes heavily, and looks quizzically at Krishna.





Reading the Gita, we come to better understand life as an inner battle, a struggle for the mind, heart, body, and spirit. And, make no mistake, it is a fight to the death. We learn that our real enemies are not outside but within: our own desire, anger, and greed. This is what makes it so hard. These archenemies have linked forces so powerfully that they are all but unbeatable. We’re losing.

The Gita boldly declares that spirituality is the only winning solution. Turn inward, it directs us, and upward. Look no further than the True Self Within.



Seated in his chariot in the middle of the battlefield, the slumping Prince Arjuna, his voice barely audible, asks, “Why am I doing this, Krishna? Life is so cruel, so demanding. I don’t know if I have the heart for battle anymore.” His eyes fill with tears, his knees soften, and he sinks deeper into the vehicle seat. “Beloved friend,” he says, “please tell me — what is it all about?”





Like water that filters slowly down through earth and comes out fresh and pure, important ideas passing down through the sands of time are eventually rubbed clean and emerge as pure truth. Although stated in different ways at different times by different peoples of the world, these truths have been known to humanity for centuries, for millennia. Though all races and eras may have their own conceptions of God, they all do have God, and Truth, and Goodness. All higher religions and philosophical systems are in nearly complete agreement with these basics.

The Bhagavad Gita is one of the earliest, clearest, and most comprehensive statements of these perennial truths. In the Gita, the Divine comes to His friend man in the middle of a vicious war and carefully expounds the laws and principles that govern human life.



We see Arjuna on the battlefield, this impressive warrior, bent, burdened, eyes glistening, pleading for the meaning of life. Krishna, totally calm, responds in effect, “Oh, you really want to know?” With that, he takes the next twenty minutes to deliver the answer — straight from the Source!





The Gita’s eighteen chapters can be divided into three clusters. The first six chapters focus mainly on knowing the True Self and, concurrently, on the need to perform one’s worldly duties effectively for society’s welfare. The next six concentrate on the very nature of the Godhead, and the great love for Him that springs from intimately knowing Him. The final six provide particular knowledge and wisdom for achieving the very purpose of existence, which is to liberate ourselves from the inevitable pain and sorrow that life deals us and ultimately to merge into that Godhead, Divinity itself.

All these are ideas of extraordinary size and power, with numerous subtleties and shades of thought. Krishna presents each of these huge ideas gradually, piece by piece, chapter after chapter, until the whole picture becomes clear.



Imagine! A man we can all identify with is in dire straits, at a crossroads, brought to his knees by the great pressures and complexities of life, shakily reaching out. And his best friend, an incarnation of God, takes his hand and walks him through the answer — explaining step-by-step the most profound secrets of all ages.





Walking through the Gita may not be bump free. Some words are unpronounceable and some of the ideas are so new to us or so different to our Western culture they can be missed, or worse, dismissed. The idea of Atma, for example, which is the Divinity in us, can feel strange to a Westerner (“me, God?”) until Atma is understood to be a version of the soul. The ideas of detaching and surrendering are anathema to most Westerners. For some, the concept of Avatar (an embodied God) is unthinkable; for others it is acceptable only if it happens to be their idea of God who inhabits a body.

Early in the story most readers agree with Arjuna’s antiwar sentiments, only to be dismayed when Krishna, seeming to justify war, tells him to go and fight! The shock diminishes as we gradually learn that it is not a question of being for or against war, or even an issue of slaying or being slain, but an issue of living by one’s inner truth and doing one’s duty. We have to keep reminding ourselves that the battle is metaphoric, that the war is being fought inside each of us and will continue throughout our lives.

There are bound to be other bumps. Many of the words in the original Sanskrit have multiple meanings (karma, for example), and some of the concepts may not appear fashionable in our times (sacrifice, duty, and purity are examples). There will probably be others.

The point is to try not to be turned off or dismiss anything in the Gita too early. These truths have survived the sands of time; what remains is amazingly pure and practical. This is a powerful work filled with Truth beyond intellectualization.

You have to read the Gita through your heart. It is your mood while reading that smoothes your way through this ancient scripture. Be as receptive as you possibly can. Toss uneasiness and skepticism on the shelf for a while. Try to suspend hasty judgments, and be more patient with unfamiliar usage of familiar words. Allow new conceptions of unity and Divinity to enter and expand you into new ways of thinking, and of being. Read it heedfully and be prepared to take contemplation breaks along the way. Let it sink in. There is a high magic in reading this way.

The magic resides in the reader’s overall attitude. This mood of acceptance is precisely how the Gita exhorts us to live our lives. This is the invaluable state of mind that brings a happier life! When we imbibe these ancient teachings in this spirit, its high message seeps into our being, prompting and penetrating every thought and act. It becomes a part of us, and we of it. Thus the process of reading the Gita becomes an actual experience of the profound truths it brings. Reading it this way is being it!

The Gita, after all, is not theology or religion — it’s poetry. It’s a universal love song sung by God to His friend man. It can’t be confined by any creed. It’s a statement of the truths at the core of what we all already believe, only it makes those truths clearer, so they become immediately useful in our daily lives. Those truths are for our hearts, not just our heads.

The Gita is more than just a book, more than mere words or concepts. There is an accumulated potency in it. To read the Gita is to be inspired in the true sense of the term: to be “inspirited,” to inhale the ancient and ever-new breath of spiritual energy.



Now, we too are there on that long-ago yet strangely current battlefield, a witness to Krishna’s grand teachings. We too are there, being let in on the secrets. We watch and listen as the Lord Himself, swinging easily between ecstasy and practicality, imparts the absolute deepest and highest teachings. We too are walking through God’s precise, loving responses to the most anguishing and important questions of humanity today.





Part 1





KNOWING THE


TRUE SELF WITHIN,


AND SELFLESS ACTION





CHAPTER 1




ARJUNA’S ANGUISH


(Arjuna Vishada Yoga)




“Why should I wage a bloody war?…

Death would be better for me!”





1 His unseeing eyes blinked several times as he spoke to his minister Sanjaya. The blind old king, Dhritarashtra, fidgeted and cleared his throat. “Tell me, Sanjaya, what is happening on the holy plain where the mighty armies of my son, Duryodhana, and the armies of his cousin Arjuna are gathered to fight?”



The old man knew that his son Duryodhana’s decision to go to war was wrong. He knew that the young king’s judgment was clouded over by his jealous hate for his cousin. The old man had felt pangs of conscience but had said nothing when his son cheated Arjuna’s family out of their rightful kingdom and then denied their requests for even a trifling parcel of the land that was rightfully theirs. The old man had maintained his curious silence when his son mortified Arjuna’s wife and the whole family in public by having a henchman attempt to strip her of her clothes. He didn’t condemn his son’s heinous attempt to assassinate Arjuna’s entire family. Nor did the old man try to change his son’s mind when the young king sneered at all the recent peace overtures from Arjuna’s family.





Indeed, the old man was so caught up in his mindless support of his son that neither ethical nor spiritual feelings could find their way into his heart. All good judgment had been lost. An unfair and ill-conceived war was about to erupt, and though he was the only person who could at this point avert the disastrous slaughter, he had no mind to do so.





2 The minister Sanjaya, because of his honest character, had been granted temporary yogic powers to see and hear what was occurring on the distant battlefield. (Sanjaya’s name means “victorious over the self.”) With a steady voice he replied to the old king’s question: “Your son, King Duryodhana, is now viewing for the first time Prince Arjuna’s opposing army all drawn up and ready to fight. It is obviously more formidable than Duryodhana had expected and he seems a bit anxious. Your son turns to his own forces as if looking for something or someone. Almost childlike in his manner, he finds Drona, his old archery teacher, in the crowd and moves quickly to him.”



Sanjaya paused and leaned toward the old man, “Why is your son running to his former teacher? Perhaps his confidence wanes, or his conscience bothers him.”





3 The old king didn’t immediately react to this, which to Sanjaya showed that the old man’s spirits were as sinister as his son’s. Sanjaya continued his description of the distant scene: “Your son, almost flinging his words at his venerable teacher, says, ‘Well, Drona, take a look at the army marshaled by your talented disciple, Arjuna. Why did you accept him as your pupil and teach him the arts of war?’ The question carries a taunt, implying that Drona had made a mistake years ago in tutoring this prince who is now the enemy.”



Sanjaya shook his head, “No one should ever speak to his teacher this way; it reveals your son’s nervousness.”





4-6 Without waiting for the old king’s reactions, Sanjaya continued his account: “Your son is now mentioning the names, one by one, of the noted leaders of Arjuna’s opposing army, some of whom were also Drona’s students. He is too carefully enunciating each name, which is an indirect but rather obvious censuring of his ex-master for the opposition’s great strength.

7-8 “But now your son realizes that he has overstepped his bounds and switches to listing the leaders on his own side. He puts the teacher Drona at the top of his list, clearly a patronizing gesture. As your son continues speaking, the generals standing close by appear uncomfortable with the too careful way he is voicing their names.”

9-10 Sanjaya waited a moment, as though continuing to watch the far-off scene, and then resumed his account. “Sensing his generals’ discomfort, your son abruptly stops. ‘But we have many heroes on our side,’ he says, ‘and they’re ready to lay down their lives for me!’ But again his words don’t fit his demeanor. There’s a forced bravado in his voice; it’s not clear whether he’s putting down his own army or the opposition’s. It’s as though your son is unwittingly spelling ruin to himself and our forces even as he attempts to put weakness on the enemy.

11 “He tries to rectify this, and blurts an order to his generals, ‘Go, assume your positions,’ he says and then adds, ‘But at all costs protect Field Marshal Bhishma.’ His words and manner again reveal doubts, as if he does not trust his own generals. Or perhaps his concern about protecting Bhishma, the venerable old man both sides call ‘grandfather,’ is a grasp at a semblance of righteousness for his own side.”

12 Sanjaya stopped talking as he watched the events unfold on the distant battlefield, and then resumed his narration: “Now, Bhishma, as if trying to cheer your son and rescue the deteriorating situation, is suddenly roaring like a lion and blowing his conch, indicating that the battle has begun!

13 “All the armies standing behind him have suddenly come to life, blaring forth their conches, kettle drums, cymbals, cow-horns, and trumpets. It’s a loud, tumultuous noise.

14-15 “Now the opposition, led by Prince Arjuna and his lifelong friend Krishna, are answering this deafening roar with long, wailing blasts on their own conches.

16-18 “This incites all their forces to join in trumpeting and pounding drums — a noise that fills earth and sky with reverberations. The tumult seems even greater than that of the army of your son, although Arjuna’s army is smaller.

19 “Like thunder, the noise of the opposition seems to 19 tear through the hearts of your son’s armies. It’s as if the respective clamors of the two sides echoes the relative justness of their causes. The opposition’s greater commotion seems to abnormally penetrate the hearts and consciences of your forces.”

Arjuna Loses His Resolve



20-23 The old blind king squirmed in his seat, but ever-honest Sanjaya ignored it, and continued his commentary. “Your son’s blood enemy Prince Arjuna, aware that the fighting is about to begin, lifts his bow and speaks with an obvious — perhaps too obvious — zeal. ‘Krishna,’ Arjuna says, ‘place my chariot between the two armies! I want to view those who come here daring to fight for the evil-minded Duryodhana.’

24-25 “Everyone on both sides watches as Krishna drives Arjuna’s splendid war chariot onto the open field between the two armies and positions it in front of the opposing generals. ‘Behold the gathered foes,’ Krishna says with an edge in his voice.

26-28 “Arjuna now looks long at both armies, staring especially at his paternal uncles, teachers, cousins, and various benefactors, friends, and comrades on both sides. As his eyes fall on those who are now his enemies, his attitude seems to waver and he appears confused. He begins to speak to Krishna but the words get caught in his throat. The prince collects himself and again begins, ‘Seeing my kinsmen gathered here ready to fight,’ he says, ‘all of a sudden I am overwhelmed by my emotions.

29-30 “‘My arms and legs feel heavy, Krishna. My mouth is dry and my hair stands on end — and my body is shaking. See!’ Arjuna holds out his hand and even he is surprised at the forcefulness of his tremors. He clears his throat and continues, ‘I can hardly hold my bow. My skin burns all over. My mind whirls. I can barely stand up. What is happening to me?’ ”

31-32 With this indication of Arjuna’s weakness, a slight smile formed on the old king’s face. Sanjaya noticed it and continued his account. “Arjuna takes a deep breath and speaks, ‘I see bad omens for our side, Krishna. I can’t see any good coming from slaying my relatives. This is unlike our earlier days of glory, Krishna, old friend. Now I don’t desire victory, or a kingdom, or pleasures. Of what use are they? Of what use is life, Krishna?

33-35 “‘It is for the sake of the people on our side — our own teachers, relatives, and allies — that we seek the pleasures of victory and kingdom. Here they are in battle gear ready to give up their property and even their lives. It’s all so useless, Krishna. Even though these enemies want to kill me, I don’t want to kill them — not even for the kingship of the whole world or even the heavens. If these great prizes hold no interest for me, why should I wage a bloody war for this paltry kingdom?

36-37 “‘I would be forever ashamed, Krishna, if I were to kill my kith and kin. I could never find any satisfaction in such slaughter. Though their bows are drawn to kill, to slay these people would be a sin. So what if they’re evil? They’re my relatives. How could I ever again be happy?

38-39 “‘I know they are overcome with greed. And I know they are blind to the evil in all their treachery. But does that justify my being blind too?

40-41 “‘Old friend,’ Arjuna continues to Krishna, ‘when a family declines, its traditions are destroyed, and the entire family loses its sense of oneness. Without unity, the women get corrupted, and with the decline of women the world is plunged into chaos.

42-45 “‘Social turmoil is hell, Krishna, for the family, for the destroyers of the family, and for the whole society. It is said that those who destroy family unity have to live in hell. Ah! And yet here am I, goaded by greed, ready to kill my own kinsmen!

46 “‘Krishna, if those same relations attack me and kill me, unresisting and unarmed on this battlefield, so be it. Death would be better for me!’”

47 At those final, labored words of Arjuna, Sanjaya stopped his commentary for a moment and then told the blind old king what he saw. “Now, the great warrior Prince Arjuna, overcome by anguish in the middle of the battlefield, slumps to his chariot seat and flings his bow and arrows to the floor of the chariot.”





CHAPTER 2




THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE


(Sankhya Yoga)





“ . . . the cessation of your pain and sorrow will depend on how well you overcome your ignorance of your True Self that lives within you.”





1 Arjuna’s eyes were burning with tears of compassion and confusion. The blind old king was rejoicing, thinking an easy victory was at hand. Sanjaya continued his straightforward report of the distant battlefield:




2 As Krishna watches the once-brave warrior prince plunge into pitiable weakness His normally soft eyes become steely, and He speaks. “Arjuna, where does all this despair come from? This egoistic self-indulgence at a time of crisis is shameful and unworthy of you. You are a highly evolved, cultured man who is supposed to live a truth-based life, a life of dharma.And yet your confused mind is unbalanced and would not know truth if it hit you over the head.




3 “I know you are astounded at My lack of commiseration, but you must not yield to this feebleness! Truth and right can never be obtained by the weak. You are a great warrior, a proven winner. Cast off this faintheartedness. Stand up, O scorcher of enemies!”



4-5 Arjuna interrupts: “I can’t believe you’re telling me to fight!” He shakes his head as though trying to clear his mind. Krishna sits quietly. Arjuna breathes deeply and blurts, “How?” The word hangs in the air between them. “How?” he repeats, “How can I not be weak, Krishna? For me to attack Bhishma, who has been like a grandfather to me, and assault my beloved former teacher Drona, would be wrong! I should revere these elders, not shoot at them. I don’t want a blood-smeared victory.


6 “If I kill them, I would not care to live, Krishna. It would be better to be killed myself. Ah,” he mutters ruefully, “I don’t know which way to turn. Either way, winning or losing this battle, I lose.”





Arjuna Becomes the Disciple,


Krishna the Divine Teacher




7-8 “I’m utterly confused,” Arjuna continues, “as to what is my duty. I can’t think of any remedy for this awful grief that has dried up my energy, Krishna. If I were to gain great wealth and power, what would that prove? I’m asking you to help me, not to just tell me to go out and fight. I beg you to tell me what I should do. I am your pupil; be my teacher, my guru.I take refuge in you and surrender to you. Please instruct me, beloved Krishna, show me the way.”

9 The great warrior-prince, who has never known retreat, slips deeper into his dark dejection. He mumbles, “I shall not fight,” and becomes silent.

10 Now that Arjuna has submitted himself as a pupil, Krishna transforms into His true role as the Divine Teacher. He tightens the reins in His hand, looks long into the crestfallen warrior’s eyes, and begins to speak.

11 “You may grieve sincerely, Arjuna, but it is without cause. Your words may seem wise, but the truly wise one grieves neither for the living nor the dead!

12 “There has never been a time when I, or you, or any of these kings and soldiers here did not exist — and there will never be a time when we cease to exist. Physical bodies appear and disappear, but not the Atma (the soul, the life force) that lives within them.

13 “This life force comes and dwells in a body for a while. While therein, it experiences infancy, childhood, youth, and old age, and then, upon death, passes eventually to a new body. Changes such as death pertain to the body, not the Atma.The wise person does not get caught up in the delusion that he or she is this body, Arjuna. This delusion is the very definition of ego.

14 “Arjuna, the contact of bodily senses with objects and attractions in the world creates feelings like sorrow or happiness, and sensations like heat or cold. But these are impermanent, transitory, coming and going like passing clouds. Just endure them patiently and bravely; learn to be unaffected by them.

15 “The serene person, unaffected by these worldly feelings and sensations, is the same in pain and pleasure, and does not allow him- or herself to get disturbed or sidetracked. This is the person fit for immortality. Realize this and assert your strength, Arjuna. Do not identify your True Self merely with your mortal body.

16 “Real,as used in spirituality, means that which is eternal, never changing, indestructible. This is the very definition of ‘Reality.’ That which is Real never ceases to be. Anything that is impermanent, even if it lasts a very long time and seems durable, eventually changes and thus does not have true Reality. The wise ones understand the difference between the Real and the not-Real. When you fully understand this profound fact, you will have attained the zenith of all knowledge.

“One’s body, according to this logic, is not Real. And yet, there is something that dwells within the body that is Real: the Atma — which is existence itself; awareness, pure consciousness.





17 “Get to know this Reality. It pervades the entire cosmos and is unchanging and indestructible. No power can affect it. No one can change the changeless.

“This Atma,Arjuna, is like space or sky. Clouds appear in the sky but their presence does not cause the sky to grow apart to make room for them. In the same manner, the Atma (the True Self Within) remains ever itself. Things of the material universe come and go, appear and disappear, but the Atma never changes.





18 “Only the body is mortal. Only the body will come to an end. But the Atma,which is the True Self Within, is immortal, and will never come to an end. So fight, O Warrior!

19 “You talk about killing or being killed; know that the body may be killed but the indwelling Reality (the Atma)can never be. To say that one person slays and the other is slain may be correct from a physical worldly standpoint, but it is not the Reality of the matter.

20 “The Atma,this Real us, was never born, nor will it ever die. In fact, this eternal Reality within is never destroyed; it never undergoes any changes. When your ego takes over and you erroneously identify your self with the body, you feel that physical death is death to the self, and that is frightening. But the Self (Atma)can never be ‘killed.’ When the body is slain the Atma remains unaffected.

21 “The one who understands this hard-to-grasp principle of Atma — the True Self Within that is eternal, indestructible, and changeless — realizes that at this level of comprehension there is no ‘slaying’ and no ‘causing another to slay.’

22 “As a person sheds a worn-out garment, the dweller within the body casts aside its time-worn human frame and dons a new one.

23-24 “The Indweller — the Self, Atma — remains unaffected by all worldly changes. It is not wounded by weapons, burned by fire, dried out by wind, or wet by water. This indwelling Self is all-pervading (which means it is everywhere). It is also eternal and changeless because it is beyond the worldly dimension of time — time has no access to it.

“Arjuna, the cessation of your present pain and sorrow will depend on how well you overcome your ignorance of your True Self that lives within you.”





The Qualities of the Atma




25 “It is not easy — as I said, Arjuna — to fathom this mysterious concept of the True Self. Everything else in the world changes. Every creature, rock, blade of grass, human being, element, or component of any kind changes. Only the Atma never changes! Because it is never modified it is termed immutable.Because it is invisible, has no form, and cannot be heard, smelled, or touched, it is termed unmanifested.Because the human mind cannot perceive or conceive it, it is said to be unknowable.Why grieve over a Self that is immutable, unmanifested, and unknowable?”

26-27 Krishna lets those ideas sink in, and then continues. “Even if you do choose to see yourself as a worldly body that dies, why suffer this anguish? Your despondency steals your strength. Death is inevitable for all the living. You know that death is certain in all of nature, so why mourn that which is natural? Nothing — absolutely nothing — in nature is permanent.

28 “All beings are temporary. Before birth, they are unmanifested (nonmaterialized). At birth they become manifested. At their end they again become unmanifested. What is there in all this to grieve over? Grieving over the temporary just uses up your energy and holds back your spiritual growth.

29 “No one really understands the Atma,Arjuna. One person sees it as wondrous, another speaks of its glory, others say it is strange, and there are many who listen but do not comprehend it at all. Very few even think of inquiring into what is beyond this physical world.

30 “I am well aware that I have veered into high philosophy, but you must understand that all beings, whether called ‘friend’ or ‘enemy,’ have this indestructible Atma within. You must be poised above this debilitating sorrow of yours.”





The Warrior’s Personal Karma




31 “One’s personal duty in life (one’s sva-dharma) should be viewed as one’s responsibility to his or her highest Self, the Atma.This ultrahigh level of duty carries with it the requirement that one never does anything that is contrary to this True Self Within. And even if you consider your sva-dharma more narrowly from the standpoint of being true to your profession, you should not hesitate to fight. For a warrior, war against evil, greed, cruelty, hate, and jealousy is the highest duty.

32 “The tide of fortune comes in but rarely. This war is a great, unsolicited opportunity for you to fight for righteousness; for a warrior this is no less than a free pass to heaven. Therefore, rejoice, Arjuna. Be happy. This is your opportune moment!

33 “But if you do not fight this battle of good over evil, you will fail in both your worldly duty and in your duty to your very Self. You will violate your sva-dharma.Not doing the right thing when it is required is worse than doing the wrong thing.

34 “If you do not do your duty the tale of your dishonor will be repeated endlessly. For a man of honor to go down in history as dishonorable is a fate worse than death. Ordinary human beings naturally strive to preserve their lives, but the warrior has a different way. Warriors must be ever ready not merely to safeguard, but to sacrifice their lives for a cause. Knowingly surrendering your life to an ideal increases your glory.

35 “But your superb soldiers will think it was fear that made you withdraw. Though they esteemed you before, they will treat you and your name with derision.

36 “Your enemies who have harbored a grudging respect for your prowess in battle will slander you and ridicule your bravery. Do you really think they will believe that you withdrew out of love for kith and kin? Those who used to shudder at the thought of fighting you will crack insolent jokes about your faintheartedness. Failure to do your duty will destroy the well-deserved reputation you built over many heroic battles.

37 “This battle is a righteous cause, Arjuna. No matter what happens, you win. If killed, you immediately enter heaven; if victorious, you achieve a great name and fame. Either way, you triumph. So, arise, Arjuna! Fight!

38 “And heed this important point about life in general: The way to win this great war is to react alike to both pain and pleasure, profit and loss, victory and defeat.”





The Secret of Selfless Action




39 Krishna, as though to solidify that point, pauses a moment and then continues. “You have now heard an intellectual explanation of the principle of Atma (the True Self), and of the need to discriminate between the Real (unchanging) and the not-Real (anything that changes). Now pay attention while I explain a practical spiritual discipline called karma yoga for living a more effective, happier life in this vexing, ever-changing world. This is the path of selfless, God-dedicated action. By making this your path you can live a spiritual life and yet stay fully active in the world. You can remain a man of action, achieving your very best, and yet not be bound or caught by the worldly.

40 “Karma yoga (literally, ‘union with God through action’) is not in the least bit dangerous, Old Friend. On this path no effort ever goes to waste and there is no failure. Even a little practice of this will protect you from the cycle of death and rebirth.

41 “When one’s actions are not based on desire for personal reward, one can more easily steady the mind and direct it toward the Atma,the True Self Within. For the person of steady mind, Arjuna, there is always just one decision, but for the quivering mind pulled in a thousand directions, the decisions that plague it are endless, and they exhaust one’s mental strength. People with an unsteady mind inevitably end up failing; those with an unwavering mind achieve great success.

42-43 “There are people, ignorant of this principle, who take delight in their own particular dogma, proclaiming there is nothing else. Their idea of ‘heaven’ is their own enjoyment. The main reason they do their activities is to achieve the pleasures and power that ‘heaven’ promises. Thus, even though their motive is common and positive, they are in truth filled with rather selfish desires.

44 “With their minds thus taken up by their own selfish desires for everlasting pleasure and power, they are not able to develop the utter concentration needed to reach union with God, which is mankind’s only real objective.

45 “The scriptures describe three components of nature (called gunas).I will describe these in more detail later, but for now, concentrate on transcending all of them. Focus on going beyond all of nature and all worldly attachments. To be bound to worldly nature is certainly not the purpose of life. Focus instead on the Eternal that lies beyond this worldliness. Concentrate on freeing yourself from the tyranny of the so-called pairs of opposites. Release yourself from always trying to evaluate and judge everything. Disentangle from your habit pattern of seeing things as good or bad, lovable or hateful, pleasant or painful, and so forth. The tendency to get trapped in apparent opposites is a common and debilitating malady. Instead, remain tranquil and centered in the Self (Atma).Take care not to seek acclaim or acquire earthly objects.

46 “A reservoir that is necessary during a dry spell is of little use during a flood. Similarly, to the enlightened person even scriptures are superfluous. Yes, live amicably with worldly existence, but know you must transcend it. Prepare yourself for nothing less than union with Divinity itself!

47 “Work hard in the world, Arjuna, but for work’s sake only. You have every right to work but you should not crave the fruits of it. Although no one may deny you the outcomes of your efforts, you can, through determination, refuse to be attached to or affected by the results, whether favorable or unfavorable.

“The central points of issue, Arjuna, are desire and lack of inner peace. Desire for the fruits of one’s actions brings worry about possible failure — the quivering mind I mentioned. When you are preoccupied with end results you pull yourself from the present into an imagined, usually fearful future. Then your anxiety robs your energy and, making matters worse, you lapse into inaction and laziness.





“One does not accomplish great ends in some by-and-by future, O Warrior. Only in the present can you hammer out real achievement. The worried mind tends to veer from the only real goal — realizing the Atma,uniting with Divinity, the True Self Within.





“The ideal, Arjuna, is to be intensely active and at the same time have no selfish motives, no thoughts of personal gain or loss. Duty uncontaminated by desire leads to inner peacefulness and increased effectiveness. This is the secret art of living a life of real achievement!





48 “To work without desire may seem impossible, but the way to do it is to substitute thoughts of Divinity for thoughts of desire. Do your work in this world with your heart fixed on the Divine instead of on outcomes. Do not worry about results. Be even tempered in success or failure. This mental evenness is what is meant by yoga (union with God). Indeed, equanimity is yoga!

49 “Work performed with anxiety about results is far inferior to work done in a state of calmness. Equanimity — the serene mental state free from likes and dislikes, attractions and repulsions — is truly the ideal attitude in which to live your life. To be in this state of mind is to be lodged in the Divine. Pitiful are those pulled by the fruits of their action.

50 “When you are endowed with this basic detachment, you shed the karmic consequences of both your good and bad deeds, casting aside the inevitable effects of your actions. Never lose sight of the overriding goal, which is to free yourself from bondage during this lifetime, to shed attachment to worldly things, detach from ego, and truly release yourself from the wheel of birth and death. When you do this, you actually become one with God.

“I see that you sigh at this breathtaking goal, Arjuna. Know that you can achieve this by first uniting your heart with God and only then pursuing worldly things. Proceed in this order, not in the reverse order, and then your actions will be linked to the very purpose of life — which is, again, union with the Divine.





51 “A yogi is a truly wise person whose consciousness is unified with Brahman (the Godhead).* True yogis are detached. They are not at all concerned about the fruits of their actions and thus have left all anxiety behind. Detachment is the means to convert misery-laden karma (here indicating the entangling consequences of one’s acts) into misery-free living. Detachment is the means for rising above worldly activities and getting to a state beyond the worldly.

“Achieve that transcendent state, Arjuna, and enter the battle not merely as a soldier but as a man of true wisdom, a yogi.These high spiritual teachings are not meant just for the recluse; they are intended for active people like you, immersed in the hustle and bustle of the world.





52 “When your mind crosses the mire of delusion and your intellect clears itself of its confusion about the truth of who you really are, your True Self, then you will become dispassionate about the results of all your actions.

53 “At present, Arjuna, your mind is bewildered by conflicting ideas and philosophies. When it can rest steady and undistracted in contemplation of the True Self Within, you will be enlightened and completely united in love with the Divine. This is where yoga reaches its culmination: the merging of individual consciousness in Cosmic Consciousness. This is nothing less than the goal of life!”





Description of the Illumined Ones




54 Arjuna, listening attentively, interrupts. “But Krishna, how does one identify the enlightened person you describe, the one absorbed in the Divine? How would such a one speak, sit, or move about, for example? If I knew that I could better strive for it.”

55 Krishna answers, “Old friend, you should strive to become such a person! This person is called an Illumined One, a Sthithaprajna (literally, one who is established in wisdom). This is the one who abandons all selfish desires, cravings, and torments of the heart; who is satisfied with the True Self (Atma)and wants nothing outside the Self. This one knows that real bliss is only found within.

56 “This is the man or woman whose mind is unperturbed by sorrow and adversity, who doesn’t thirst for pleasures, and is free of the three traits that most tarnish the mind — namely attachment, fear, and anger. Such a one is an Illumined One, a Sthithaprajna.

57 “The person who is detached, desireless, who neither rejoices nor gets depressed when faced with good fortune or bad — that person is poised in wisdom above worldly turmoil and is therefore an Illumined One.

58 “The Illumined One has learned to deftly withdraw the senses from the attractions of the world, just as the turtle naturally pulls in its limbs to protect itself. This is very important, Arjuna. Let Me explain further.

59-60 “When people pull back from worldly pleasures their knowledge of the Divine grows, and this knowing causes the yearning for pleasure to gradually fade away. But inside, they may still hanker for pleasures. Even those minds that know the path can be dragged away from it by unruly senses.

“Much of one’s spiritual discipline must therefore focus on taming wayward senses and being ever vigilant against the treacherousness of the senses. The refinement of an individual or a society is measured by the yardstick of how well greed and desires are controlled.





61 “The Illumined Ones subdue their senses and hold them in check by keeping their minds ever intent on achieving the overarching goal of union with God. They get in the habit of substituting Divine thoughts for attractions of the senses.

62-63 “The downward spiral to one’s ruin consists of the following process: Brooding on (or merely thinking about) worldly attractions develops attachments to them. From attachments to sense objects come selfish desires. Thwarted desires cause anger to erupt. From anger arises delusion. This causes confusion of the mind and makes one forget the lessons of experience. Forgotten lessons of experience cloud the reason, which results in loss of discrimination (between Truth and non-Truth, Real and not-Real). Finally, losing the faculty of discrimination makes one veer from life’s only purpose, achieving union with the Divinity within. Then, unfortunately, one’s life itself is wasted.

64-65 “But when you can move about in a world that surrounds you with sense attractions, and yet be free of either attachment or aversion to them, tranquillity comes and sits in your heart — and you are absorbed in the peace and wisdom of the Self within. Serenity, Arjuna, is the point at which all sorrow ends!

66 “This Atmic wisdom (knowledge of the True Self) is not for all. Those with agitated, uncontrolled minds cannot even guess that the Atma is present here within. Without quietness, where is meditation? Without meditation, where is peace? Without peace, where is happiness?

67-68 “The roving mind that attaches to the objects of the senses loses its discrimination and is adrift, a ship without a rudder. Even a small wind blows it off its safe-charted course. Those who use all their powers to restrain the senses, steady the mind, and free themselves from both attachment and aversion — they are the people of true wisdom, Illumined Ones.

69 “Worldly people perceive existence itself quite differently than do spiritually wise people. It is like night and day; what is nighttime for one is daytime for the other. What worldly persons experience as real — the body, earthly pursuits, pleasure, pain, illness, sensory attractions — the Illumined Ones see as not Real and of no consequence. What the Illumined One knows as Real — Spirit, quietness, and so forth — the unenlightened consider to be unreal and of no value.

70 “Waters from many rivers continually flow into the ocean but the ocean never overfills. In a like manner, desires and attachments constantly flow into the mind of the Illumined One, but he or she, like the ocean in its deepest depths, is totally still and never disturbed.

71 “To gain access to this state of utter peace, Arjuna, you must be free of ego (the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’), and live devoid of cravings. You must forget desire.

72 “This is the fixed, still state of the Illumined One, the Sthithaprajna,the one firmly established in union with God. Once one achieves this state, one never falls back from it into delusion. Furthermore, the person in this state at the instant of death merges into Divinity and becomes one with the Divine. And this, Arjuna, as I have often repeated, is the very goal of life!”

*Brahman, the Godhead, is the Supreme, Divine Presence—the Absolute Highest Consciousness (not to be confused with Brahma, the Creator, or Brahmin, the priestly class).





CHAPTER 3




THE PATH OF ACTION


(Karma Yoga)





“Do your worldly duty, but without any attachment to it or desire for its fruit. Keep your mind always on the Divine.... Make it as automatic as your breath or heartbeat.”





1-2 Arjuna interrupts, “O Krishna, you’re adding to my confusion! You imply that knowledge is greater than action, but then you push me to fight this awful war. Well, fighting is action! Please be clearer: Which path, knowledge or action, is right for me — which one will without a doubt bring me to the supreme goal?”


3 Krishna replies, “Over the many good years that we have been as close as brothers I have not made this totally clear to you, but now I will. Know that at the very beginning it was I who laid out both spiritual paths: knowledge and action. I established the path of knowledge for the more contemplative person and the path of action for the busy, action-oriented person.



“Remember, Arjuna, true knowledge is knowing the Atma, the True Self Within. When you clarify your intellect through either contemplation or selfless action you get to realize the Atma.Both paths lead to realization of Self.





4-5 “Those who merely shirk worldly activities, thinking they are ‘renouncing’ action, cannot attain the Supreme goal. You first have to act. Mere refusal to act is futile. Even the supposedly ‘passive’ goal of clarifying the intellect and acquiring knowledge cannot be achieved without action. Look at nature. The fruit engaged in its task of ripening does not ‘renounce’ its task and sever its connection to the tree until it is fully ripe. Indeed, Arjuna, inaction, for even a moment, is impossible. Eating, sleeping, breathing, the heartbeat, even subconscious mental activities — all are actions. Everyone is helplessly driven to action by their own nature and by nature itself. Action is inherent throughout nature. From the single whirling atom up to the entire universe, all is movement, action.


6 “If one sits motionless but with one’s mind ever thinking of sense attractions, that too is engaging in action. If you think that merely being motionless is being actionless, you are being a hypocrite and deluding yourself.




7 “Engage in action, do your work, but with full control of your mind and senses. And be aware that the work you do should contribute in some way, directly or indirectly, to the higher good of humanity.




8 “One is obligated to work, to act, even to maintain one’s body — bathing, eating, sleeping, breathing. So do your obligated duties, Arjuna. Duty-bound action is far better than inaction.”





The Law of Sacrifice





9 “Action (karma)normally ties the human being to the wheel of birth and death, but not when performed as an act of sacrifice — not when the person offers up both the action and the fruits of the action to Divinity. Then, the action is nonbinding. One’s job in life is to act selflessly, even sacramentally, without thinking of personal benefit. It is very possible for you to make great moral and spiritual progress in worldly life through action and yet not become fastened to the negative consequences of your actions.



10 “In the beginning, when I created the world, I set in motion the principle of sacrifice, saying, ‘It is through sacrifice that thou shalt prosper and propagate.’ My word ‘sacrifice’ is in no way associated with the common image of self-neglect or self-flagellation. Sacrifice is used here in a very special way: it means offering, helping, and being dedicated to the welfare of all humanity. It implies a mutuality of existence with all other beings. Sacrifice in this spiritual meaning of the word is a universal rule, a fundamental law of nature; sacrifice as the spirit of giving, which permeates all of creation. This sacrifice is a way for mankind to convert earthly misery into happiness.

11 “Worship, for example (also a misinterpreted word, which means honoring and revering), is a meaningful form of sacrifice as I use the term. Therefore, Arjuna, revere and honor (worship) the devas,the Divine entities, subtle powers of nature that dwell in sacrifice. Cherish them and they will cherish you. This mutuality is good for all humanity.

12 “Dear old friend, you should strike a balance in life between giving and getting. When you engage in selfless service (which is sacrifice),your desires are fulfilled, unasked, by nature. Righteous people give more than they receive; indebted ones get more than they give. The one who receives without giving is stealing.

13 “You should even eat your food in the spirit of sacrifice. Then you are freed from the strong attachment to tastiness and enjoyment that so quickly binds one to physical gratification, which is a bottomless pit. The person who eats solely for physical enjoyment gets turned away from life’s true purpose: achieving Divinity. Indeed, the very definition of sin is not, as so many think, committing evil acts, but veering from God. In that sense, eating merely for physical pleasure is a sin.

14 “The very cycle of life emanates from the subtle effects of sacrifice as here defined. Let Me explain the cycle: all living creatures are nourished and sustained by food; food is nourished and sustained by rain; rain, the water of life, emanates from nature, called down from heaven, freely given (sacrificed) for the eventual benefit of humanity. All of life, Arjuna, is therefore born of, nourished, and sustained by selfless action, by sacrifice.

“Sacrifice is the noblest form of action. Work performed in the right attitude of mind becomes sacrifice. Service is sacrifice. This level of sacrifice actually has Divinity in it, performing it becomes a subtle but powerful mental force. This makes life itself sacred. Eventually, all your actions, mental and physical, become an offering (a sacrifice) for the betterment of the universe.





15 “As I said, every selfless, sacred action (every sacrifice) is born from Brahman, the Godhead, the Absolute Highest Consciousness. He is present, consciously, in every act of service. Work performed with the best of motives becomes sacrifice. Life itself is turned into a sacrifice when directed to the service of Divinity. When people perform service as sacrifice, no matter what their work or profession, the universe itself becomes elevated and sublime. The whole scheme of nature is centered not on grabbing, but on offering selfless action, which is sacrifice.

“This important law of life may seem distant from the individual, Arjuna, but that is not so. Each selfless act done by anyone contributes in an important way to this mysterious whole.





16 “All life turns on this law of sacrifice, called ‘the wheel of yajna.’ Those who veer from this and seek instead to indulge the senses for personal gratification and ignore the needs of others, live in vain and squander their life. Why did I, the Creator, set this in motion? Because this world is a learning ground, a place to discipline, train, and elevate all beings. If we decline to learn we cannot derive the benefit of the schooling.”





The Self (Atma) Is Beyond Karma




17 “Arjuna, those who have found the pure contentment, satisfaction, and peace of the Atma (the True Self Within) are fulfilled. They have nothing more in this world to accomplish, no more obligations to meet. Being in the Atma,these people are beyond karma.

18 “The one who is firmly established in the Atma knows the real meaning of being Self-sufficient. That person has no dependence of any kind on anybody and has nothing to gain or lose by either action or inaction.”





Work as God Works




19 “The point, old friend — and this is very important — is to do your worldly duty, but do it without any attachment to it or desire for its fruits. Keep your mind always on the Divine (Atma, the Self). Make it as automatic as your breath or heartbeat. This is the way to reach the supreme goal, which is to merge into God.

20 “There have been many who have done this. The renowned King Janaka (an ancient karma-yogi) attained union with God by performing worldly duties in this spirit. The ignorant cannot lead the community, Arjuna; it is the enlightened who are the best servants of society. So do your worldly work without attachment and for the best interests of all.

21 “Whatever a great man or woman does, others also do. Eminent people must in the public interest put forth their best virtues. Then ordinary people try to rise to that level.

22-24 “Consider Me, Arjuna. There is nothing I do not have, so I have nothing to gain in this or the other worlds. And yet I continue doing. If I, Divinity, were to stop working, humanity would follow that example and this would inflict havoc. Indeed, if I cease to act it would cause cosmic chaos and result in confusion and the destruction of humanity.

25 “The people who are ignorant of the True SelfWithin work as though tightly harnessed to action, working for their own welfare. But enlightened persons who know the True Self work for the welfare of the world, unattached, ever helping to point humanity toward dharma (right action, living a truth-based life).

“And yet, do not bewilder the ignorant who are hungry for selfish action. Let them continue to work, but show them by example that work can be made sacred when done in the right spirit, with the heart fixed on Divinity.





27 “The ignorant one, mistakenly identifying with the body, erroneously thinks, ‘I am the doer.’ This is the mark of egoism. In truth, Arjuna, all actions are really performed by worldly nature, not by Atma.The Self (Atma),remember, is beyond all action, all karma.

28 “The person who really knows nature — which I will explain to you in detail later — knows that when the senses, which are a part of nature, attach themselves to worldly objects, which are also a part of nature, it is merely nature attaching to nature. It is only ‘I,’ this ego-self, doing this or that. The wise one, aware of this, stands apart and just watches this play of nature.

29 “The wise ones who understand these things should not refrain from action, as that would confuse the minds of the unknowing who are entangled in and tied to the consequences of action (karma).There is no harm in some people performing their duties with attachment; work with attachment has its place in humanity’s evolution.”





Transmuting One’s Own Nature




30 “Now that you are aware of the indispensable necessity of performing action, I will tell you the best path for you, old friend. Shake off this fever of ignorance that has enveloped you. Break free of your ego. Stop thinking of worldly rewards. Fix your mind in Me, the Truth, your Atma,the Divinity within you. Know that it is the Divine who propels all actions in the universe. Offer up all your actions to Me, Divinity. And then, with a perfectly clear mind and heart, go forth, fight this battle of life!

31 “There are marvelous benefits from this selfless way of life, Arjuna, but you cannot acquire them without firm faith. These principles must be lived, not intellectualized. Those who earnestly live them are released from their karma,the consequences of their actions.

32 “But those who carp about these teachings and do not practice them are deluded and without spiritual discrimination. They are the cause of their own sorrow and ruin, and become lost.

33 “All living creatures, even wise sages, behave in accordance with their own nature. This is an important point. Everyone’s behavior is rooted in the thoughts and the tendencies that predominate in them. This is the meaning of one’s ‘nature.’ Therefore, if one’s nature is so powerful, one might well question the value of even attempting to live by the scriptural injunctions to ‘do this, don’t do that.’ One could ask: ‘Why, if we are but pawns of our nature, should we even try to restrain it?’

34 “The answer is not to try to restrain your nature but to progressively improve your nature. Examine this thing called ‘nature’ more closely. One’s own senses are major stumbling blocks to spiritual attainment. Senses derive their power from the many likes and dislikes imprinted in the mind (by family, by culture, and by one’s actions in this and previous lives). This deeply embedded, largely unconscious system of likes and dislikes is what gives rise to one’s thoughts, desires, and tendencies. This mental pattern is in large part what is meant by one’s ‘nature.’

“Arjuna, the best thing to do with these thoughts and desires is to transmute them into a devotional attitude, a desire for God. When this attitude takes hold, the system of likes and dislikes melts away, which causes the fierce power of the senses to gradually dry up. Desires are enemies when directed outward, but allies when pointed inward toward Divinity.





“Remember, Arjuna, that life in the body and senses is not an end in itself, but only a passing phase. Truly, if the eye does not help one visualize God in everything it sees, it is better to be blind. If the ear drags one into filthy cacophony, it is better to be deaf. The senses should not be instruments that plunge you into muck; they should serve your interests, control your appetites, and help you dwell in Divinity.





35 “And do not think, Arjuna, old comrade, that it would be easier to abandon your present responsibilities. One’s duty in life is one’s dharma.This essentially means that you have to live by your inner Truth rather than your selfish desires. One must do one’s duty. No matter how devoid of merit your responsibilities and commitments may seem, they are preferable to the responsibilities of another, no matter how well you may perform them. You, Arjuna, are a warrior-prince by birth and training. If you now try to avoid your duty and mutate into a sanyasi (spiritual ascetic) merely because you face doing some things that you imagine are painful, you will be violating your inner Truth (your conscience, your dharma),which is the root basis of your life! It is even better to die doing one’s own duty than attempt to do the duty of another.”





The War Against Anger and Desire




36 Arjuna’s head droops, and then he asks, “What is this awful force that drags us even against our will into selfish deeds?”

37 Krishna replies: “That awful force is desire.Desire is the force that drags you — selfish desire, which rises from your action-oriented nature. Selfish desires are insatiable; the more you feed them the more they crave. That is what I meant by ‘bottomless pit.’ Desires never say, ‘Enough.’ And anger is always linked with desires, and anger corrupts everything. This desire-anger duo is your direst, most formidable enemy here on earth.

38 “Desires cloud your spiritual light and bury your power of discrimination. As a flame is covered by smoke, and a mirror is covered with dust, and an embryo hidden in the womb, true knowledge is concealed by desire. For spiritually advanced people, desire is like smoke and is easily blown away to reveal the light of knowledge. For worldly-caught people desire is more like dust that requires vigorous wiping so the light can shine. For really dull persons desire so enfolds them they are like an embryo buried in darkness; only time and a new birth will bring light. Note, Arjuna, that in all these levels of spiritual attainment it is desire that shrouds the glow of one’s True Self Within.

39 “Greed is but desire swollen to grotesque size. The wise one knows that desire is the eternal, insatiable archenemy, and tries to steer clear of it. But despite one’s best efforts, desire still puts on many disguises and sneaks furtively into the heart and mind.

40 “The key bastions of this fiercely destructive enemy have to be found out before you can lay siege to them. Marauding desire has captured, and now firmly occupies, all three bodily stations: the senses, the mind, and the intellect. From these three field headquarters desire attacks and kills wisdom and discrimination, and shrouds the Atma within.

41 “Therefore, Arjuna, O fond friend and greatest of warriors, attack these marauders, these desires. Recapture your senses, mind, and intellect (higher mind, buddhi,which we will deal with later) and use them for Divine purposes. When you kill desire the splendor of Atma will shine.

42 “And know the strategic positions you should occupy in this war. Desire holds more firmly to the subtle (the more refined and difficult to notice) than to the gross. The senses are more subtle than the body; the mind more subtle than the senses; and the intellect more subtle than the mind. Far above all is the Atma,subtlest of all, which is beyond any and all desire.

43 “Therefore, Arjuna, realizing the truth of your True Self (Atma)is your principal weapon for eradicating desire. Self-realization is the true spiritual knowledge (called jnana).This level of knowing is beyond all your lower qualities, no matter how fine, including your mind and even your intellect. Let your very highest Self, your true nature, rule. Control your self with your Self.”





CHAPTER 4




INTEGRATING KNOWLEDGE,


ACTION, AND RENUNCIATION


(Jnana-Karma-Sanyasa Yoga)





“Whatever path a person travels to Me is My path. . . . All paths lead to Me.”





1 Krishna then says, “I taught these same eternal truths to Surya (the Sun God), Arjuna. He passed them on to his son Manu, the very earliest man, and he to his son Ikshvaku, who was the first king, so that he could better handle his worldly duties.



2-3 “Handed down in this way through the ages, eminent sages learned these great secrets. But through time, the right type of people became scarce, and the practice of this knowledge dwindled. I use the word secrets not because these truths are hidden but because so few people are prepared to hear them today. I’m giving these truths to you now, Arjuna, because I love you and you are worthy to receive this grace.”


4 Arjuna looks puzzled, and interrupts, “But Krishna, how can a modern man instruct an ancient one? We have been close friends for many, many years, and I love you dearly, Krishna, but you are only five or six years older than I am. You were born ages, eons after Surya and those others. They are from a past so distant it is beyond imagination. Why do you say it was you who taught this in the beginning? And please don’t just tell me it was you in an earlier life! That makes it even more strange.”




5 Krishna laughs within Himself, knowing the right moment has come. “Arjuna,” He says, “people say the sun rises and sets, but it does not ‘rise’ or ‘set,’ it is merely out of their sight. I am like that. I am not born nor do I die, but ordinary mortals, seeing me ‘coming’ and ‘going,’ think that I am born many times. For the sake of simplicity, let me say that you and I have both passed through many, many births. In this present lifetime you have forgotten them while I remember them all. I am aware of the continuity of My existence as Atma down through the countless ages, but you are unaware of your Atma, your lasting reality. That is the difference between us.”





Krishna’s Declaration





6 “And know also, Arjuna, that as the Divinity in all creatures and all of nature, I am birthless and deathless. And yet, from time to time I manifest Myself in worldly form and live what seems an earthly life. I may appear human but that is only My maya (power of illusion), because in truth I am beyond humankind; I just consort with nature, which is Mine.



7-8 “Whenever goodness and dharma (right action) weaken and evil grows stronger, I make Myself a body. I do this to uplift and transform society, reestablish the balance of goodness over wickedness, explain the sublime plan and purpose of life, and serve as the model for others to follow. I come age after age in times of spiritual and moral crisis for this purpose.


9 “Strange? Yes. It is difficult for most people to comprehend that the Supreme Divinity is actually moving about in human form. But for those few who dare to learn the secret that it is I, Divinity, who is the Operator within them, their own Self, My coming in human form is a rare opportunity to free themselves from the erroneous belief that they are their bodies.



10 “Thus freed from this delusion these special ones seek refuge in Me, the Atma. They become absorbed in Me, always thinking and remembering the Divinity within themselves. Purified of their selfishness, fear, and anger by the fire of this great knowledge, they, as many before them, reach the Supreme goal. For all intents and purposes these special ones become one with Me. This is absolutely true; give up any doubts.

11 “You may think this is partiality, but I have no favorites. Whatever path a person travels to Me is My path. In whatever way a person approaches Me, I return like for like. If they treat Me as father or mother, I treat them as My children. If they serve Me as master, I accept their services as their Lord. If they worship Me as a child, I approach them as a child. Those who pine for Me, I pine for. To those who see Me as friend I am friend. Even for those who perceive Me as enemy I approach as an enemy. All paths lead to Me, Divinity.

12 “Most who long for success in worldly pursuits pray to the gods (the minor deities) that their needs be fulfilled. In truth, any desire is a form of prayer, and often results in quick success. The higher the ideal, however, the more arduously one has to pursue it and the longer one must wait.

13 “In the beginning, I established the evolutionary system in nature whereby beings evolve toward spiritual perfection. I then established four groupings of people for the harmonious working of societies and the progress of humankind. These classifications correspond to progressively higher levels of consciousness and moral and spiritual attainment. All societies have generally similar groupings. The system sometimes unfortunately veers from its proper course, but know that the basic pattern is valid for the social harmony and clarity of purpose in all societies.

“And know, Arjuna, that although people are, at their core, all one, there are differences within them based on their karma (the consequences of their previous actions), and based on their natural makeup. And know that even though I am the author of these distinctions, I (the Atma within) am untouched by them because I am beyond all karmas, all consequences of My actions.”





Freedom from the Wheel of Karma




14 “Karmas do not cling to Me (Atma) because, as I mentioned, I am not concerned with the fruits of My actions. Anyone who really understands this principle of Atma, the True Self Within, is likewise not bound by the consequences of their own actions.

15 “This is not a new discovery. The ancient seekers of liberation were well aware of it. They carried out all their worldly actions without any sense of ego, incurring no karmic consequences. Do the same, Arjuna.

16-17 “But even great sages sometimes were perplexed as to what is action and what is inaction. I will tell you which actions (karmas) you should perform and which ones to avoid. This secret can actually free you from the wheel of death and rebirth.

18 “The truly wise person (the jnani, the yogi, the Sthithaprajna, or Illumined One) is the one who recognizes inaction in action, and action in inaction. He or she sees that where there is apparent action taking place at the worldly level, there may be true inaction within the individual; likewise, where there is no apparent worldly action taking place, there may be considerable action occurring on the inner level.

“Arjuna, truly wise persons are in the world but not of it. They may be very busy with earthly matters but their heads and hearts stay in solitude. They are connected in this way to the Atma within. These are the wise ones untouched by karma.





“Those who are ignorant of the True Self, thinking instead that they are the body and the doer, may attempt to renounce worldly actions, but at the inner level they still have the turmoil resulting from their attachments and desires. That inner turmoil is itself action, and thus they are still incurring karmic consequences even while supposedly not acting.





19 “The truly wise act without scheming for the fruits of their actions, and are therefore without inner turmoil. This breaks the chain of karma. All their selfish desires have been consumed in the fire of knowing that they are not the body or the doer, but are indeed the Atma, the True Self Within.

20 “These ideas are new to you, dear friend, so listen closely. The wise ones I have been describing are ever-content and need nothing. They have abandoned all external supports. This is true personal freedom. They act, but to them the actions are adorations of Divinity. Disentanglement from desire for the fruits of their actions is the key to their success.

21 “Expecting nothing, hoping for nothing, abandoning everything, they keep the mind and senses under control. Having conquered desire they incur no negative karma even while acting in the world.

22 “These wise ones have transcended the pairs of opposites; they are the same in success or failure, indifferent to loss or gain; they never bother to compete or compare, are free of envy, and contentedly shoulder whatever comes to them. They too are not bound by karmic consequences even though performing worldly actions.

23 “All your karma melts away when you are unattached, when your mind is purified in the knowledge that all life is one, and when you perform your duties in the spirit of sacrifice as an act of devotion, an offering.”





The Various Attitudes of Worship




24 “Arjuna, everything, every thing in creation is the Godhead! What is being offered is Brahman; the very act of offering is also Brahman; the one who offers is Brahman; even the fire into which the offering is poured is Brahman. God is not distant, but is within yourself and is your Self. See Divinity in all your actions and you can actually achieve Union with the Godhead, Brahman. To do so requires being fully absorbed in Brahman, being constantly aware of Divinity every moment. No matter what you may be doing, whether eating, sleeping, working, praying, or breathing, this attitude of worship (which, remember, is sacrifice) aids the development of true knowledge and wisdom.

25 “Some aspirants offer worship to the minor gods. When performed with true devotion these offerings bring spiritual growth. More evolved seekers fully dedicate themselves to the highest Godhead, Brahman, surrendering their individual consciousness to the Cosmic Consciousness — offering up their ego to the Lord.

26 “Some advanced aspirants actually learn to suspend the physical senses of hearing, sight, taste, touch, and smell — offering them into the fire of sense restraint. In this way they control the stimuli at the gate before these enter their perception. Others do the opposite — not restraining the sensations before they enter, but controlling the influence of them on the mind itself. Both approaches produce the same result: purification of the mind, which is absolutely necessary for Self-knowledge.

27 “Others who are deeply knowledgeable (of the True Self Within), in rare acts of worship offer up all their actions and all the activities of their senses, and even the functions of life energy, their heartbeat and breathing. Their minds become suspended, the objective world is negated, ego vanishes. At these times, ego stripped, the Self is so fully identified with Atma — which is the personalized version of Brahman — that the performer of this sacrifice actually merges into Brahman.

28 “There are yet others whose way of worship is to offer up wealth and possessions. Still others offer up self-denial, suffering, and austerities (purifications). Others take clerical or monastic vows, offering up knowledge of the scriptures. Some others make their meditation itself an offering.

29 “Some offer up prana, the mysterious vital energy force within them. They do this through control of the breath, literally stopping their inhaling and exhaling.

30 “Yet others abstain from food and practice sacrifice by spiritualizing their vital energy — that is, by figuratively pouring their own vital life force into the Cosmic Life Force. The whole point of all these various methods of sacrifice (worship) is to develop a certain mental attitude. Those who live with a truly worshipful attitude, whose whole lives are offered up for improvement of the world, incur no sin (no karmic debt).

31 “This world is not for the person who performs no sacrifice, no worship. But those who actually live their lives as an offering partake of the nectar of God. Through selflessness they reach the Divine.

32 “Thus, as you can see, Arjuna, many and various are the offerings that people spread before God. All of them spring from the workings of the mind, senses, and body. Although action in its ordinary form is binding, when converted into worship (devotion) it is liberating. To be devotional is the sacred plan of nature.

33 “Offering up knowledge (spiritual knowledge of True Self, and so forth) as a sacrifice is better than any material offering. The goal of all your work, all actions, is not to multiply your possessions beyond proportions (which only makes you earthbound), but to bring you to spiritual wisdom (jnana), intuitive knowledge of the True Self Within. You are alive solely to become enlightened and united with God.

34 “Another good attitude that aids the development of spiritual knowledge is to wholeheartedly revere someone who has genuinely achieved it. When one sincerely strives for spiritual enlightenment, Divinity in some way puts one in contact with an enlightened teacher. Sincerely question that teacher. As a burning candle can light many others, an illumined soul can bring light to many a competent inquirer.

35 “Arjuna, once you gain spiritual wisdom you will never again be deluded or confused. You will see all of creation in your True Self, and in Me.”





The Power of Self-Knowing




36 “Spiritual knowledge (jnana) does what nothing else can do. Even the foulest of misguided persons can sail across the treacherous river of sin on the raft of this special knowledge.

37 “Like a blazing fire, knowledge of True Self Within reduces all three karmas to ashes: distant-future karma, near-future karma, and current karma (prarabdha), which is the karma that is presently working itself out. This Atmic knowledge destroys the first two karmas and renders the third type ineffective even as it operates.

38 “In all the world, nothing purifies like spiritual knowledge (knowing the Self). But it takes searching inquiries into the nature of the Real and not-Real, and giving one’s mind wholly to it. In due time one comes to know these things in one’s heart.

39 “Hold spiritual wisdom as your highest goal, Arjuna. Make your faith deep. Restrain your senses. Then you will arrive at this wisdom quickly and achieve the perfect peace of Divinity.

40 “The ignorant (uninformed about Atma and without faith) waste their lives. Through their disbelief they alienate themselves from the Self and thus from true unity with others. As miserable people, they cannot be happy either in this world or any world beyond.

41 “People who really know Divinity, who have renounced attachment to the fruits of their work by offering it to the Divine, who have used the sword of knowledge to cut to pieces their doubts regarding the truth of their Atma — no bonds can hold these people. Though they are ever occupied with action, karma cannot taint them.

42 “O Prince, your ignorance of your True SelfWithin is the cause of your present reluctance to act, just as the opposite of ignorance, Self-knowledge, would bring fearless action. So with the sword of wisdom sever the doubts in your heart. Arise, O best of men, take your stand. Be a warrior!”





CHAPTER 5




CONTEMPLATING THE GOAL


(Sanyasa Yoga)





“Knowing this, you come to the place where all paths meet, and you achieve lasting peace of mind.”





1 Arjuna blurts out: “I’ve been listening carefully Krishna, but one moment you recommend the path of knowledge or contemplation (a sort of sanyasa yoga), and the next moment, the path of desireless action (karma yoga). These seem to conflict. Which one is definitely better for me?”




2 Krishna replies, “Both paths lead to the same goal, which is liberation (moksha). But karma yoga, the action path, is better for you, Arjuna, and for most people. Many spiritual seekers assume they should withdraw like a sanyasi (renunciate), and they may for a time be blessed with tranquillity, but most often it is merely the ego masquerading as quietism.




3 “The person of selfless action (karma-yogi) who feels neither desire nor aversion and does not yearn for one thing or loathe another is the true ‘renunciate.’ What matters is not what you call yourself, but whether you escape your self-will (ego). With no ego you break free of karma.




4 “The uninformed think these two paths — renunciation (sanyasa yoga) and action (karma yoga) — lead to different results, but that is not true. They are essentially the same; compare them.




5 “Right knowing (jnana yoga) leads to right doing. Right doing (karma yoga) gives rise to right knowing. Take either path to the very end and they meet. At that place the contemplative seeker of knowledge greets the person of action, and they are both equally free from the cycle of birth and death. The person who knows this oneness of paths really knows the Truth.”





The Role of Action (Karma)




6-7 “As I mentioned earlier, Arjuna, you cannot renounce action without first performing it. The karma-yogi comes to realize through the direct experience of selfless action in the world that life beyond the pull of worldly desire is better than life entangled in it. Without direct experience one has to rely on theory and concepts. Theorizing and make-believe have no place in one’s spiritual career.

“The mind absorbed in the Divine even while engaging in earthly activities gets purified. Purifying your mind means that your sense of doership vanishes and God becomes the doer. It also means that you realize your Self as the Atma in all beings. This purity of mind and heart leads to higher spiritual discipline and thus to true oneness with the Godhead. It is at this highest of high places where the paths of renunciation and action converge.





8-9 “The enlightened person always thinks, ‘I (the Real I) do nothing; I (this body ‘I’) am but the instrument.’ He or she is constantly aware of this while seeing or hearing, touching or smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping, breathing, speaking, letting go or holding on, or even when opening or closing the eyes — aware that all these activities are but interactions among bodily senses and worldly objects. The activities may seem real but it is not the Self, it is merely nature at work. All actions pertaining to bodily existence take place in the worldly self, which is not the real Self. Atma, as you have learned, is beyond all worldly matters.

10 “As the lotus floating on the surface of muddy water stays untouched by the water, when you offer all actions to the Divine and surrender any yearning for the results, you cannot be tainted.

11 “Purity of action, mind, and heart is absolutely essential for further spiritual growth. To a karma-yogi who has turned his or her whole life toward Divinity, the body, senses, and intellect are just instruments for self-purification. Any work this karma-yogi performs is done dispassionately, and this enhances spiritual unfolding.

12 “The karma-yogi offers all works and all desires for the fruits of works to the Divine — and thus wins eternal peace in the Divine. But the person impelled by selfish desire gets entangled in agitations and anxieties of the mind.

13 “The true yogi, being a self-controlled person who has mentally cut free from worldly actions, lives content as the indweller, a mere resident in a body. These yogis do not incessantly drive themselves to act, nor do they involve others in action.

14 “It is mysterious, Arjuna. God established this system but does not operate it. Divinity does not determine the worldly doings of humanity, nor does It instill the sense of doership (ego) into humanity — nor even does It link actions to the consequences of actions. Nature does all this. All actions, all works, all karma, belong to nature, not the Divine. It is humanity that determines its earthly destiny. People seal their own fate.

15 “Further, God is neither responsible for nor takes note of anyone’s bad or even good deeds. Both bad and good karma are the result of actions performed by people who mistakenly think that their True Self (Atma) is connected to the worldly— which it is not. This is an elusive but important point. The Divine is absolute perfection, poise, and bliss. Worldly acts have no place in this blessed purity. Thinking otherwise is what I mean by ignorance and delusion. I repeat: God, the True Self in each living being, is in no way a part of the goings on in worldly nature.”





The Light of Wisdom




16 “As the darkness of night vanishes when the sun rises, so too the darkness of ignorance and delusion is dispelled when you gain knowledge of your True Self.

17 “Jnana-yogis, persons of wisdom (whom I previously referred to as Sthithaprajnas, Illumined Ones), cast out this ignorance of mind and thus erase past impurities. They ever fix their purified minds on Divinity and stay completely absorbed in the Divine, their one and only goal. In this way they merge into God and are freed from the birth-death cycle, never to be born again.

18 “They know that sunlight falls equally on all creatures. Those who possess this wisdom of Self look with a unified vision upon all beings and have equal love for all, whether those beings are spiritually advanced or the least in the ranks — or even a cow or a dog. The real knower of Brahman sees only Divinity everywhere, in every being and every thing.

19 “Even while in a body, these enlightened beings (jnana-yogis or jnanis)transcend any notion of an existence separate from God. They continually focus their minds on the absolute oneness of Divinity, and on their own unity with That. Since the Divine is flawless, they are likewise without blemish or bias, reflecting God’s utter perfection. This perfection is the same in all; it is called Atma — and yet, only the wise perceive it.”





Attaining the Bliss of Brahman




20 “The wise ones, Arjuna, are totally free from delusion. They know the Supreme Godhead (Brahman), and directly experience their own identity in That. They are neither elated by good fortune nor depressed by what is painful; they neither rejoice nor grieve. They know that the sensation called pleasure appears and disappears like a flash of lightning, and know that the cost of pleasure is inevitably misery and pain, which is indeed a dear price.

21 “These undeluded persons need no external supports whatsoever. Through intense meditation on the Divine, fully absorbed in God, they have realized the eternal bliss that comes with living in the Self (Atma). With this spiritual awareness they rise above desire for sensory attractions and experience constant bliss. God intoxicated, they revel in Divinity and in nothing else.

22 “The wise recognize the transient nature of worldly gratification and thus do not look for happiness in the realm of the senses. Sensual delights are the wombs of misery. Earthly pleasures, though they seem enjoyable, are fleeting and ultimately painful. Wise ones know that misery inevitably, without fail, marches in lockstep with worldly pleasure.

23 “Desire and anger are counterparts, Arjuna. Anger is your response to the frustrations of unfilled desires. When you can control or transcend desire and anger (which arise in your body, not your Atma) you will have found true, lasting happiness.

24 “Those who find joy and peace completely within are the truly happy ones. Their bliss is in direct proportion to their disentanglement from worldly attractions. Eventually, they actually become one with Divinity, the very Source of the bliss that resides inside.

25 “These wise ones’ sins (errors) have been washed away. Their desires, and the anger and greed that always accompanies desires, have vanished. Their ignorance has disappeared, cast out by knowledge of the Atma. Their minds and hearts are firmly resident in the Divine, always seeking to contribute to the welfare of all. Those who attain the eternal bliss of Divinity are the real holy ones.

26 “Those who actually experience Divinity have severed 26 the chains of selfish desire. Through constant, intense effort they have taken charge of their minds and bodies and are actually above desire, anger, and greed. They now dwell in their True Self experiencing eternal bliss everywhere!

27-28 “The process for vanquishing the mind and senses consists of shutting out the external world, focusing one’s gaze on the center of spiritual consciousness between the eyebrows, and gradually equalizing the in-going and out-going breath. Then, when the body, mind, senses, and intellect are under control (without desire, fear, and anger), realization of the constant freedom and bliss within the Godhead comes.

29 “Ceaselessly think only of Me, Arjuna. Know that I, the Godhead (Brahman), am the object of all worship and the receiver of all offerings. Know that I am the source of all and the friend of all beings everywhere. Knowing this, you come to the place where all paths meet, and you achieve lasting peace of mind.”





CHAPTER 6




TAMING THE MIND AND SENSES


(Dhyana Yoga)





“…not simply to know God, but to literally become one with God! This is the profound plan and purpose of creation that is hidden from most people.”





1 Krishna continues the dialogue: “The person who works in the world without needing or expecting a reward is both a sanyasi (true renunciate) and karma-yogi (action yogi). But the person who merely refrains from acting in the world is neither of these. You cannot just discard worldly duties, but must do them to the utmost extent of your human capacity for excellence.




2 “I repeat, Arjuna, nobody can really become one with the Godhead without leaving their desires behind and abandoning their attachment to the fruits of their actions. The paths of desireless action (karma yoga) and renunciation (sanyasa) may seem to be different from one another but they are not. All spiritual growth is based on surrendering attachments and selfish motives.




3 “The path for those who are climbing to spiritual heights is selfless action (karma yoga). For those who have made the summit (union with God), deep serenity and absence of thought is their way.




4 “God cannot be perceived in the mental ferment of the worldly. You have to blot out thoughts of the world. When you are no longer attached to performing action and have eliminated any desires for worldly things, only then will you have climbed to the highest state of yoga (which again is union with Divinity).



5-6 “I must emphasize, Arjuna, that you have to lift yourself by your own efforts! You must not allow yourself to be demeaned by your ego-self. Know that the self can be both friend and foe — a friend when used to conquer the mind, senses, and body; a foe when it drags one into the mind, senses, and body. True Self (Atma) is the ally; the ego-mind self is the enemy.


7 “The serene person who is absorbed in God, living thus in peace, is the true renunciate. Maintaining an even mind in heat and cold, pleasure and pain, honor and disgrace marks the spiritually mature. Maintaining physical, mental, and intellectual balance no matter how difficult the challenge leads to permanent cheerfulness, which is the sure sign of a yogi. (Recall, a true yogi is not a spiritual recluse, but a godly person of discipline who lives fully in the world.)




8 “The person who knows the Atma has conquered the senses and is calm under all circumstances — that person has climbed to the summit of human consciousness. That yogi considers a clod of mud, a stone, or a gold nugget with the same equal-mindedness. Worldly people pursue earthly things; godly ones pursue only the Divine.




9 “The yogi who looks with the same eye upon saints or sinners, relatives or strangers, friends or foes, well-wishers or even those wishing harm is indeed supreme.”





The Method of Meditation




10 “To attain this godly state, Arjuna, you must become fully immersed in the True Self through the process called meditation (dhyana yoga). You have to control your mind, body, and senses and become free of possessions, expectations, desires, and greed. You must live alone, at least internally, in a quiet place. This inner discipline called meditation is imperative because it is the means for achieving lofty and necessary ends.

11-12 “The method of meditation includes locating a clean spot to sit, neither too high or low, covered with kusha grass, a deerskin, and a cloth, in that order.* Then, the meditator strives to still all thoughts and sensations. Thus cleansing the mind returns it to its original state, inviting God to enter.

13-14 “While meditating, sit up straight, keep your body still, and keep your eyes from wandering by gazing at the tip of your nose. Or close the eyes and focus on the center of spiritual consciousness between your eyebrows. Remain in perfect calmness with your thoughts fixed on Me, the Divine.

15 “Through long concentration one’s mind ceases its wandering. After some time one develops what is in essence a new sensory faculty known as medhanadi, an intuitive penetrating skill that makes knotty issues of life no longer problems. The yogi with his or her mind constantly on the Divine finds deep serenity, the zenith of Self-realization, and merges with Me.

16-17 “People who eat too much or too little or who sleep too much or too little will not succeed in meditation. Eat only food that does not heat up the body or excite the mind. When you balance and regulate your habits of eating, sleeping, working, and playing, then meditation dissolves sorrow and destroys mental pain.”





The Yogi




18-19 “The mind has long been dissipated by worldly things and does not easily come under sway, Arjuna. But when one perfectly controls and fully withdraws the mind from selfish cravings, one is in yoga, union with Divinity. The mind of the yogi, totally focused on the True Self, is unwavering like the steady flame of a candle in a sheltered place.

20 “When the mind becomes still and quiet, the Self reveals itself. At these depths one experiences the joy and peace of complete fulfillment.

21-22 “When you dive deep into this infinite bliss of the Lord, which is above and beyond the senses, you never again wander from the innermost Truth. The goal and the means for reaching the goal become one and the same; life itself becomes a meditation.

23 “In this supreme state you desire nothing else whatsoever and cannot be shaken by any calamity. To be in this mental state is to know the real meaning of yoga (union with God). Indeed, to achieve this state is to sever your contact with pain and surely bring an end to all your sorrow.

24-26 “Renounce all selfish desires, which are but products of the ego. Use your mind to curb all your senses. Rein in your restless and fidgety mind from wandering outside to seek stimulation and satisfaction. Turn it inward and train it to rest in God. Keep your attention anchored in the Atma, your True Self. Think of nothing else. Then, peace and quiet will gradually arise in you.

27-28 “The one who reposes in utter quiet with the Divine, cleansed of desires and passions, who knows the truth of Atma, rests in the Supreme bliss of Brahman. Constantly united with the Godhead, this yogi’s bliss is eternal.

29 “Touched in this way by God, this yogi sees unity and the True Self (Divinity) everywhere, in every creature, in all creation.

30 “Those who see Me in everything and everything in Me, know the staggering truth that the Self in the individual is the Self in all. As they live in constant spiritual awareness, I am never out of their sight or lost to them — nor are they ever out of My sight or lost to Me.

31 “Those who are in this cosmic union with Me, worship Me (Brahman) in the hearts of all. Whatever their external way of living or status, as they have shifted from self to God they live their lives in Me — and thus each of their contacts with other beings is, inwardly, an adoration.

32 “These high yogis know with certainty that they are one with Brahman, and therefore one with the universe. Thus they experience the joys and sorrows felt by others as happening to the whole. This is the loftiest spiritual union. I regard these yogis as highest of all — ”

33-34 Arjuna interrupts again: “It’s impossible, Krishna! My mind is so restless, so turbulent I can’t imagine ever being able to achieve the loftiness you’re teaching. The human mind is a nursery of waywardness, so strong it can drag an elephant, full of stubborn desires for worldly things. Indeed, it’s like a mule. If it doesn’t get what it wants it turns petulant and scheming. My mind can never be caught; it never halts in one place. Trying to catch and tame it is like trying to restrain the wild wind.”

35 Krishna breaks into a smile. “You know the nature of the mind, Arjuna. It is restless and hard to subdue, but it can be done. There are four main ways to do it: through regular practice, relentless inquiry, nonattachment, and firm faith. Let Me explain.

“Through regular practice (abhyasa) you can draw the mind away from worldly attractions and back into the Atma. As it becomes more interior it becomes calmer. Relentless inquiry into the Self (vichara) leads to knowledge of Atma, the True Self Within. Nonattachment (vairagya) results from self-inquiry and discrimination (viveka). When you actively turn your thoughts to all the bad consequences of the desires as they arise in you, the passion for them gradually dries up. As your passion diminishes, your mind comes under control. Firm, dedicated faith (sraddha) brings you the raw force of determination, will. All four methods are subsidiaries of the practice of meditation.





36 “Those who have no mastery over their ego will find it difficult to control the mind. But those who struggle hard by the correct means (relentless practice and nonattachment) will prevail over their wayward minds.”





Krishna’s Promise




37-39 Arjuna again interrupts, “What if one dies trying, Krishna? What happens to the imperfect yogi who may have faith but simply can’t subdue his mind and therefore wanders from the path, loses sight of the goal, and then dies, foiled in the attempt? Will this yogi have failed in both worlds, this one and the hereafter, like the cloud that just dies in the sky, unable to fulfill its mission of dropping rain? Dispel this dark cloud of doubt in me, Krishna.”

40 Krishna responds, “Spiritual work is never wasted. Fear not, my friend. One who does this good work will not come to a bad end in this world or any world beyond. You must know this profound truth, Arjuna: The one who strives for realization never comes to grief !

41-43 “According to the law of karma, souls reincarnate in environments befitting their spiritual attainments. Good people (even those who have veered from the spiritual path) go, when they die, to the heaven of those who do good deeds. They dwell there for a number of years and then take birth again, this time into a home that is pure and prosperous. A few of them will be born into a family that is spiritually advanced, but such births are difficult to obtain. When this happens, the good environment draws out their latent spirituality and leads them rapidly toward liberation.

44 “The ones born into the pure and prosperous houses have the opportunity at first to enjoy the relatively tame desires they held in their former bodies. But as soon as those pleasures are done they feel irresistibly drawn to spirituality by the force of the good habits they strove for in the previous life. Even those who showed only a faint interest, merely inquiring about spiritual matters, progress further than the ones who merely follow the rites and ceremonies of their belief systems unthinkingly, and thus stall their true spiritual advancement.

45 “Through constant spiritual effort over many lifetimes a person becomes purified of all desires and achieves the ultimate goal of becoming one with God. Being a yogi means that one is seriously on the path but not necessarily at the end of it. One is a ‘yogi’ during the process of becoming and should persist birth after birth, until fit for merging with the Supreme Godhead.

46-47 “The yogi moving toward Divinity is deemed more highly evolved than ascetics who practice severe penance, higher than the learned ones who know the scriptures, and above the ritualists who perform their rites seeking favors. All of these are to some extent still entangled in desire. So be a yogi, Arjuna!

“Know that the true yogi has chosen a great yet attainable ideal in life: to turn Godward, to constantly and consciously move toward Divinity — to not simply know about God, but to know God in the fullest sense, to literally become one with the Divine!





“This is the profound plan and purpose of creation that is hidden from most people. Arjuna, be the one who gives Me his whole heart. That yogi will be My very own.”





* Some details of the ancient methods have of course changed over the years, but the principles are the same.





Part 2





THE


VERY NATURE


OF GOD





CHAPTER 7




BOTH KNOWING AND


EXPERIENCING DIVINITY


(Jnana-Vijnana Yoga)





“I know every being past, present, and future, but nobody knows Me completely.”





1 Krishna says, “LetMe be very clear, Arjuna. It may seem impossible to you, but a mere human can indeed come to know God — not merely about God, but to really know God. Listen while I explain how to do that: Through devoting your whole mind to Divinity (Me), loving only Me, meditating on Me, and depending wholly on Me as your only refuge, you will, without any doubt, come to know Me in My entirety.




2 “For this, you will need both knowledge of Divinity (jnana) and wisdom of Divinity (vijnana). I will give these to you. The difference between them is this: one learns knowledge through the senses and mind — that is, through sight and thinking; one gains wisdom through direct grasp, through insight and intuition. Knowledge ‘knows’ it at an intellectual level; wisdom ‘realizes’ it fully and is able to apply it in daily living. Once you combine both of these there is nothing more you need to know in this world.




3 “Only one person in many thousands seeks full God-knowledge. And of these, only one in many thousands truly gains it. Despite these odds, it is the intent of God that all beings are, in the fullness of time, destined to reach this degree of perfection. The rare ones who do attain this level of knowing become indistinguishable from Divinity (Me), and thus achieve liberation.”





The Essence of Divinity




4-5 “Listen closely and I will explain the essence of Divinity. First, know that I have two aspects, a lower and a higher. My lower self is the realm of nature (prakriti). According to the ancient system of knowing, this is comprised of eight basic components: earth, water, fire, air, ether (space), mind, intellect (higher mind, buddhi), and ego. Note that these basic components are arranged in ascending order from gross matter (physical and chemical elements) to the more subtle and refined: mind, intellect, and ego (which is the basic sense of being a physical self). And note that all eight of these components, even the very subtle ones, belong to prakriti, the cosmos, the world of nature.

“Beyond this world of nature I have a second, higher aspect that is distinct from all of nature and yet interacts with it. This is My spiritual realm (Purusha). Purusha is the life force, the source of consciousness in all beings, and the animator of all life. This mysterious power supports and sustains the entire universe.





6 “The commingling of these two realms, nature (which is inert matter) and spirit (which is life consciousness), is the womb of all beings. Life itself originates in this union of nature and spirit. The entire universe evolves from these two aspects of Me, and will finally dissolve into Me.




7 “I am Pure Consciousness, Arjuna, the underlying essence of all elements and beings. Nothing whatsoever exists separate from My Divinity. There is no power in the cosmos that does not emanate from Me and belong to Me. The entire universe is suspended from Me as if I were the string in a necklace of jewels. The gems may differ vastly, but the force holding them all together, the central thread, is Me, Divinity.




8 “I am the innate nature of everything. In pure water I am the sweet taste. In the sun and moon I am the radiance. In the very center of human beings I live as virility and courage. I am the sacred word Om, which designates the Divine, and I am the sound of it heard throughout the universe.




9 “I am the slight, delicate scent, the sweet fragrance of the earth. I am the brilliance in both fire and sun. I am the light of Divinity in all beings. I am the subtle spirit in spiritual practices that gives them their existence — I am the love in the devotee, for example, or the austerity in the ascetic, or the sweet sense of charity in the giver.



10 “I am the primordial seed of all entities, the power of discrimination (buddhi) in those who are intelligent, the splendor within all resplendent beings and things.

11 “Of the strong, I am their might and vigor. As I am beyond all attachments, I am the power in unselfish desire. I am the subtle force in good actions that puts them in harmony with the welfare of humanity. I am the innate urge to help others.”





Maya and the Gunas




12 “Arjuna, all of nature consists of three characteristics called gunas. The first is goodness (sattva), the second is passionate activity (rajas), the third is darkness, indolence, inertia (tamas). All these come from nature, which is My lower nature. I put on the appearance of this natural world but am separate from it. These three qualities of nature are contained within Me, Divinity, but I am not in them in the sense that I need to rely on them in any way. I do not rely on nature, it relies on Me.

13 “The three basic qualities of nature (goodness, passion, and darkness) are like the three primary colors, which combine in an infinite number of ways to create all hues in the universe. These gunas likewise combine endlessly to create all of the variety in nature. It all seems ‘real,’ but as it is constantly changing, it is not Real. Due to this maya mentality (the illusion that the world is Real), people do not look beyond the veil of illusion to Me, the unchanging consciousness, the Absolute Reality beyond all the worldly; they do not see beyond to Me, the very basis of it all.

14 “This curtain of illusion (maya) is hard to see through, Arjuna. Only those who love and depend completely on Divinity are eventually able to see through it.

15 “Those who are unable to see beyond the veil cannot, in effect, discriminate between Real and not-Real. Oblivious to the Reality of their own higher nature (the True Self Within), they sink to their lower nature and do evil deeds, committing acts that turn them away from Divinity. Not knowing the holy from the unholy, they are of course not devoted to Me, Divinity.”





The Four Devotees




16 “Four types of people seek a connection with Me: One, the world-weary — people who worship God for the alleviation of physical or mental agony, or to be released from fears and adversity; two, the seekers of happiness through worldly things — people who pray to God to obtain wealth, family, power, prestige, and so forth; three, the seekers of spiritual advancement — people whose motive for connecting with Divinity is to gain knowledge and experience to aid their self-realization; four, the wise — people who truly know the Atma (Self), who know that God alone exists, and whose only impulse is for the Divine and nothing else.

17 “Of these, the last is the highest because they know My Truth and are devoted to Me. As I am supremely dear to them, they are very dear to Me. The first three are attached to the worldly objects or mental states they desire.

18 “But certainly all four types are noble, because any reason for turning Godward will in due time lead to spiritual transformation and is therefore ultimately good. The wise ones of the last category, however, are My very Self. They know Me as the essence within themselves and are always with Me. Their devotion stands foremost. As fuel thrown into the fire becomes fire, the wise, absorbed in Me, actually become one with the Godhead, their own Divinity, their one and only goal.

19 “After many a long life of meditation on Me, these wise ones come to Me. They see that all this world is indeed their innermost Self, and realize that God alone puts on the appearance of all phenomena. Such great souls are rare indeed.

20 “Others, hoping to fulfill worldly desires, drift to lesser gods and offer rituals and rites. It is quite easy for them to get to those limited deities but the rewards are correspondingly small. Healing disease, winning litigation, acquiring a position, and other trifling psychic powers are alluring to worldly-caught people. True devotees of the Supreme Godhead give no thought to worldly things. The question of other gods does not even arise in them.

21 “And yet, Arjuna, whatever form of God people choose to worship in good faith, it is I, the Godhead, who makes their faith steady and unwavering. I do this to help them evolve stage by stage along their spiritual paths.

22 “Endowed with that steady faith, they get what they pray for. The objects they receive are, in reality, dispensed by Me. The needs of all beings are fulfilled only through Me, the Cosmic Source.

23 “The fruits they pray for, however, are ephemeral, perishable (and thus not Real), providing only fleeting satisfaction. Worshipers of these deities of the senses go to them; My devotees come to Me.

24-25 “People of little wisdom do not understand My supreme, immutable existence and thus they think of Me only as a finite figure, a worldly body. They are unable to grasp the transcendent Godhead beyond My human form. I do not reveal Myself to them. Very few can see through this veil of illusion called maya that I hold in front of Me.

26 “Arjuna, My delusive maya and I are always comingled. While others are deluded by the appearance of physical ‘reality,’ I am all-knowing. I know every being — past, present, and future — but nobody knows Me completely. If individual souls do not know their own Truth (Atma), how are they to know the truth of God, the Cosmic Soul?

27 “Why is it that people do not know this deep truth? Because as soon as they are born they are led to believe that the world around them is ‘real.’ They forget their oneness with Divinity and fall into a pattern of likes and dislikes that gives rise to all sorts of desires, attachments, and aversions. With their nervous systems thus conditioned, their sense of individuality (ego) is reinforced time and time again. It does not dawn on the impure mind preoccupied with ego to make room for devotion to God. Without that devotion it is impossible to see one’s oneness with God.

28 “But those who purify their actions by dedicating them all to the Divine gradually grow less influenced by their own habits and desires. One step at a time, they overcome the lower self, worshiping Me, the One who is not separable.

29 “No matter how strongly you ascribe to the universal delusion that you can avoid pain and only have pleasure in this life (which is utterly impossible), sooner or later you must confront the fact of your inevitable aging and eventual death. Some people, trying to escape the fear of death, come to Me for refuge. Once with Me, they learn of their True Self (Atma) and ascertain the nature of Divinity. Therefore, because death stirs people to seek answers to important spiritual questions, it becomes the greatest servant of humanity, rather than its most feared enemy.

30 “Finally, Arjuna, yogis know that it is I, the Godhead (Brahman), the Adhyatma, who presides over the entire cosmos, including the physical universe (adhibhuta), the deities who serve Divine purposes (adhidaivas), and the spirits who handle all sacrifices or offerings (adhiyajna).

“The wisdom and devotion of these yogis, these wise souls, serves them throughout their lives — and especially at the hour of death, the time when most people are scared and confused. That is why spiritual wisdom is so important. These yogis truly know their own Atma (which is Divinity itself, Me), and so they calmly accept death as a matter of course. Their God-realization is at its zenith when they drop their bodies. At that instant their whole consciousness becomes one withMy Cosmic Consciousness, and they are thus liberated from rebirth.”





CHAPTER 8




THE IMPERISHABLE GODHEAD


(Akshara Brahma Yoga)





“The point is not to hope for a good birth but to aim for a good death.”





1-2 Arjuna says, “Please wait a minute, Krishna. Your words raise several questions in me: Just what precisely is Brahman, the Supreme Godhead, and what is this Adhyatma you mentioned? And what is the essential nature of karma? What, really, are those other things you referred to — adhibhuta, adhidaiva, and adhiyajna? I know you alluded to them as spirits or dieties who serve Divine purposes, but what exactly do you mean? And how exactly are yogis united with the Godhead at the time of their death?”


3 Krishna obliges. “You have asked seven questions, Arjuna, some of them rather abstract. Time is running fast, the war faces us with open jaws, so listen closely. First, Brahman (the Godhead) is My absolute highest nature, vaster than whatever you call vast, omnipresent, immanent everywhere, the Imperishable (indestructible, undying, eternal) Divine.



“Next, the term Atma (or Adhyatma) is used to indicate the exact same vastness, the earliest Supreme Godhead existing in all individual beings. It cannot be known without great effort.





“Next, karma (here meaning action) refers in this context to My original vibrations, the initial actions that brought all creation into existence and keeps it going. (All beings are a part of this karma.)





4 “The prefix adhi means the ‘beginning’ or ‘first,’ the ‘original.’ It connects these terms directly with the all-pervasiveness of the primordial Godhead (Brahman). Adhibhuta pertains to the earliest, most initial Divinity that exists in the physical universe, and particularly in the elements and thoughts that comprise the individual. Adhidaiva refers to the primordial Divinity that dwells in the numerous lesser deities who, as My agents, operate an individual’s body, mind, and senses. The eye is illumined by Surya the Sun god, the hand by Indra, and so forth. And the term adhiyajna refers to the earliest Divinity in the act of giving, the primordial spirit of selfless sacrifice that flows throughout creation.



“The point in all this is that Divinity is actually present throughout the universe, in every object, all creatures, and each individual being — and it always has been. Furthermore, this same Divinity exists within each and every activity that all these beings do in daily life — and it has been that way forever.





“Despite the fact that humanity finds numerous ways to separate God from the world, and despite the fact that everything in the world is perishable (including your body, I remind you), know that all of it is totally pervaded by the Imperishable Supreme Divine, which is Me.”





How to Die




5-6 “Regarding your final question, which is very important, know this: whoever remembers Me at the time of death will no doubt come to Me. That person’s consciousness will merge into My cosmic consciousness.

“This is a universal law, Arjuna. The sum total of all thoughts and feelings during the whole span of your life condense into a single state of mind at the time of your departure from the body. You assume a particular mental makeup at the instant of death. Whatever occupies your attention throughout life will inevitably be your consciousness at the moment you die — and to that realm of consciousness you will go. Then, some time later, that same mental structure is manifested back into the world. This is called the next birth.





7 “So what should you do? Throughout life, prepare for the death moment. Actually, the moment of death does not mean some future instant in time, it means this very moment! Any moment may be your last, so treat each as the last because your thought at that instant is the foundation on which your next birth is assembled.



“Live in a state of constant spiritual awareness. Do everything for God. Think of the Divine every minute. Like the street musician who artfully plucks the guitar and at the same time plays the pipes fastened to it, do your earthly duties well, but simultaneously be aware at every moment of the Godhead. Do your duty, Arjuna, fight, but do it with your mind and heart fixed on Me. Then you will surely come to Me.





8 “The well-practiced mind does not wander after anything else. Through constant practice (abhyasa yoga) living becomes a lifelong meditation on the Divine. Then, no matter what you may be doing, you are imbibing godly tendencies. This becomes a habit of the mind. Educate your mind to this habit. This is how one finds God and goes to God.




9 “The Divine knows everything. The Divine is the intelligence behind the functioning of the entire cosmos, the Sovereign Ruler who designates the structure and working of the universe. The Divine is subtler than the subtle and yet the support of all; It is inconceivable, incomprehensible, as bright and unchanging as the sun, beyond the darkness of ignorance, above illusion. The Divine is the First Cause. Before Divinity there was nothing.



10 “Remember the Divine this way at the time of death. I cannot emphasize enough the importance of this. When it comes time to depart your body, still your mind completely; draw your life force utterly into the center of your spiritual awareness (between the eyebrows). In this way you will reach Divinity.

11 “I will now tell you of the supreme goal, the eternal state that is deathless, the imperishable, indestructible state that all scriptures point to, which is beyond death and rebirth. This state can be entered only by self-controlled people untainted by worldly desires.

12-13 “At the time of death, one should close down the gates of the senses, place the mind in the shrine of the (spiritual) heart, focus all life-force energy upwards to the center of consciousness between the eyebrows, and repeat the syllable Om, which represents Me, Brahman, the Supreme Godhead.

“It is not just the outer sound of Om that is beneficial; it is what happens inside. The act of vocalizing this sound helps focus your thoughts single-pointedly on the One, on God. When you are absorbed in repeating this syllable, which is in essence the Divine name, you are concentrating on the Divine — and then you will achieve the supreme goal, Divinity. As the river enters the ocean, your individual consciousness (Atma) flows into the Cosmic Consciousness, Brahman.





14 “Arjuna, in a sense this is the very essence of My 14 teachings. The easy way to merge with Me, Brahman, is to constantly, steadfastly, relentlessly remember Me always, at every moment of your life! In this way you are ever prepared for your end. One’s next birth depends on how one’s death takes place. The point is not to hope for a good birth but to aim for a good death.

15 “This world is transitory and full of suffering. Those 15 great souls who have perfected their lives and come to Me are no longer subject to rebirth into yet another lifetime. Avoid birth and you avoid death.”





The Planes of Existence




16 “The levels of existence beyond death are known 16 as the lokas (worlds). The highest among them is Brahma-loka. All of these worlds and all the beings that inhabit them, from Brahma-loka downward, are subject to rebirth, including Brahma Himself (not Brahman — Brahma, the aspect of God that acts as the creator). But the one who climbs beyond these middle planes and reaches Me, the Absolute state, knows no rebirth.

“One gets what one is worthy of, Arjuna. Those who do not advance past the notion of heaven and hell commit themselves to the intermediate worlds and tie themselves to death and rebirth.





17-19 “Contemplate the cosmic standard of time and creation. When Brahma the creator wakes up at the dawn of each cosmic day, this entire universe and all creatures in it are instantly manifested, only to be dissolved back into the unmanifested (formless) at Brahma’s cosmic nightfall. But each cosmic day and night of Brahma lasts thousands of yugas, and each yuga lasts 10,000 to 400,000 years; the time is all but incomprehensible to humans. In succeeding days and nights of Brahma, the same multitude of beings helplessly come to birth and death again and again as the physical universe continues its expanding and contracting.

“This eternal cosmic play is the same in the microcosm of the individual soul as it is in the cosmos. When an individual goes to sleep, the entire world his or her mind experiences as ‘real’ withdraws, only to ‘come alive’ again at waking.”





Immortality




20 “But beyond even the mysterious, unmanifested state into which all beings dissolve at cosmic nightfall, there is another unmanifested reality. It is Brahman, the Godhead, the Thing-in-Itself that is beyond time, that does not perish even when existence itself dissolves!

21 “It is this eternal, absolute Thing-in-Itself that is the ultimate goal. I am That, Arjuna. All those who come to this ultimate home come to Me, never again to be separate, never again to return.

22 “The only way to reach this immortal state is through love, through unswerving devotion to Me (the Divine) alone. As the individual wave does not have any existence independent of the sea, the separate soul does not have any real existence apart from Me, the Universal Soul.

23-25“There are two paths for the individual soul: to freedom from death-rebirth, or to bondage. The former is allegorically the ‘Northern’ path, which here indicates the way of light and brightness of day, symbolically a cloudless sky. This leads selfless souls (those who are free of ignorance and egoism) to the supreme Godhead. The other is the ‘Southern’ path, here meaning the way of darkness or the path of smoke or fog. This leads selfish souls (the ignorant, egoistic ones) to the lesser light of the moon and chains them to the darkness of rebirth and death.

26 “These two ways, the light (Northern) and the dark (Southern), have existed since the beginning. Following the light way (which refers not to a period of time but a state of mind) leads you to spiritual success and freedom; taking the dark way leads you to further pain and misery.

27 “Once you know these two paths you can never be deluded or misled again. Therefore, beloved friend, gain this great knowledge! Be a yogi at all times.

28 “The wise know that living by scriptural injunctions (good deeds, sacrifice, and so forth) will help you reach heaven. But the true yogi knows that even heaven is part of nature (prakriti) and thus is eventually perishable. This yogi therefore transcends all of nature to reach Me, Brahman, the Imperishable Godhead, the Divine Love who lives in your heart.”





CHAPTER 9




ROYAL KNOWLEDGE


AND THE KING OF SECRETS


(Rajavidya Rajaguhya Yoga)





“I accept with joy whatever I am offered in true devotion: fruit or water, leaf or flower. The gift is love, the dedication of your heart.”





1-2 “Since you are so receptive, Arjuna, I will now reveal the most mysterious and profound secret. Having this knowledge will liberate you from the sorrows of worldly existence. This is the royal road of ultimate knowledge, the king of secrets— knowledge of both the visible and invisible Godhead. This is purifying knowledge, fully in accord with dharma (truth-based living). It is easy to practice and a joy to hold. Once you know this secret you cannot lose it.


3 “But those who lack faith in this doctrine will fail to find Me. To cynical people with trifling objections this secret is a closed book; they are compelled to return to the cycle of death and rebirth.”





The Divine Mystery Unveiled




4-6 “I, Brahman, the Supreme Godhead, in My unmanifested (invisible) form, pervade everything and every creature in the universe. I am the origin of everything that is and is not. All beings in all the worlds exist, in spirit, within Me and depend on Me. But I do not abide in them because that would limit Me. This is the Divine mystery of Me as the unmanifested Godhead. I am never confined, attached, changed, or in any way limited. As birds fly across the sky leaving no trace, I, like the sky, am ever Myself, unaffected by anything of the phenomenal world.


7 “At the end of a kalpa, a cosmic day of Brahma (consisting of a full cycle of earthly eons, billions of years), all beings dissolve into My unmanifested matter, which at that point is the seed of their next coming to be. Then, at the beginning of the next cycle I generate them again, sending them onward at the moment of creation.




8 “Again and again I animate nature to bring forth this multitude of forms and beings, infusing spirit into their matter and subjecting all to the laws of their own nature.




9 “None of these actions in any way binds Me, Arjuna. I remain unattached and unconcerned, indifferent to the fruits of these actions. Nature, because of its proximity to Divinity, carries on the activities of creation.



10 “Under My watchful eye the laws of nature take their course. With Me presiding over the proceedings, the animate and inanimate manifest and the wheel of the world is set revolving.

11 “People who are unaware of My transcendent majesty n cannot relate to Me. They do not know that I am their very soul. They disregard Me when I come to the world clad in a body and relate to Me as just an ordinary mortal.

12 “Their ignorance makes their lives fraught with pain and disaster. The selfish ones, their minds ever agitated and never in peace, lead a hurtful life. The slothful ones live a lazy life of ignorance, seeking only to satisfy their bodily needs. All hopes and actions of these ignorant souls are in vain.

13-14 “But the great souls (mahatmas) are different. Guided by their more Divine nature and knowing My true nature, they love Me and offer constant devotion to Me — and they bear great love for all others.

“As the mind takes on the coloring of that which it constantly glorifies, these people, steadfastly revering Me and always absorbed inMe (God), literally become this love. They turn godlike and eventually merge in Me.





15 “Other great souls, those on the path of knowledge, venerate Me as the one God in the many. They have come to know that My attributes and forms are inexhaustible. They see My million faces in everyone and everything. To them all things and all beings in the universe are aspects of this one Self, God.

16 “Because I am endless, the variety of ways I am adored is endless. I am the rites and rituals of the scriptures. I am the offerings made to the ancestors. I am the food that is medicinal and nourishing. I am the formative thought behind the chanted hymn (mantra). I am the gift offered into the fire; I am even the flame itself that consumes the offering.

“Apart from Me, Arjuna, there is absolutely no thought, no object, and no act. Holding this huge idea constantly in your awareness is indeed the way to reach Me.





17 “I am the father, mother, and grandfather of this universe. I am the one who dispenses the fruits of people’s actions, their karma. I am the one thing worth knowing, and I am the enabler of all knowing. As water gets purified by filtering through earth, and other things get purified by being washed in water, mankind gets purified by contact with Me. I am the syllable Om, the very sound of Divinity. I am all the scriptures ever written.

18 “I am the goal at the end of all paths. I am the landlord of all creation. I am the inner witness in every human. I am your only lasting shelter; all beings dwell in Me. I am your best friend who lives in your heart as your conscience. I am the beginning of creation, the well-wisher of it, and the dissolution of it. I am the storehouse into which all life returns when creation dissolves — and I am the everlasting, imperishable seed from which it again springs.

19 “I give the heat of the sun. I let loose the food-giving rain, and I withhold it. I am both immortality and death (doled out based on the fruits of one’s actions). I am both being and nonbeing. In My visible form I am the cosmos; in My invisible form I am the germ that lies hidden.”





Humanity Gets What It Seeks




20-21 “Those who follow rituals and refrain from bad deeds, who offer worship and pray for heaven — they eventually reach those heavenly planes and share in celestial pleasures. But when the merits they earned in life are spent, they return to this world for yet another birth-death cycle. Caught by their own attachment to enjoyment, even the joy of heaven, they continue to come and go.

22 “Now listen carefully, Arjuna, this is the king of secrets, the crown jewel, the law of life at the spiritual level. If you think of Me only and constantly revere and worship Me with your mind and heart undistracted, I will personally carry the burden of your welfare; I will provide for your needs and safeguard what has already been provided.

“Just as the baby in the womb gets protection and nourishment due to its connection with the mother, humans also get refuge when connected with Me. But this is even greater than the baby-mother relationship because this shelter is for eternity!





23-24 “Those who faithfully make offerings to other deities are really worshiping Me, though by a more limited path. I, the Divinity in all, am the receiver and enjoyer of all offerings, all worship, all devotion. Minor gods give those who pray to them things of the world that only entangle them more in the earthly. I alone have the power to fulfill people’s prayers without snarling them in attachments. I do this to increase their devotion and further their spiritual development.

25 “Those who worship minor gods go to the gods they pray to. Those who worship their ancestors (manes) are reunited with them after death. Those who worship elemental spirits (bhutas) become like them. All these only add to earthly attachments. But those who worship Me come to Me, the Supreme Reality.

26 “I accept with joy whatever I am offered in true devotion: fruit or water, leaf or flower. The gift is love, the dedication of your heart. Devotion alone gains access to Divinity.

27 “Therefore, Arjuna, whatever you do in the world, whatever you eat, sacrifice, give up, or give away — even your suffering — offer it all to Me. Dedicate everything to Me, Divinity.

28 “By offering all your actions to the Divine you surrender selfish attachment to their fruits, and this frees you from the karmic consequences of your actions — whether the consequences are pleasant or painful. With your mind unshakably on this path of renunciation you will be united with Me.

29 “I am equally present in all beings and show the same face to all creation; none are favored, none are hateful, and none dear. But those who loveMe with brimming heart become absorbed in Me, and as they dwell in Me, I am revealed dwelling within them.

30-31 “I dwell even in the misguided. Know, Arjuna, that the change from profligacy to purity is not uncommon. If a person soiled with the wayward actions of a lifetime but turns to Me in utter devotion, I see no sinner. Newfound dedication can quickly refashion one’s nature. Know this for certain: no one devoted to Me falls!

32 “Everyone who takes refuge in Me, whatever their birth, gender, or position in society will attain the supreme goal of merging into Me. This is true even for those whom society may scorn or consider to be ineligible (women in some cultures, for example, or lower classes in others). There is no such thing as a sinful or wicked birth. Where there is a hurricane of love in the mind and heart all human distinctions vanish.

33-34 “You have found yourself born into this transient and joyless world, Arjuna, so turn from it and take delight in Me. Give all your love to Me. Adore Me, the One Divine. Make all your acts an offering. Surrender to Me. Make Divinity your fondest ideal and highest goal. Set your heart and mind on Me as I here prescribe, and you will indeed enter into My very being.”





CHAPTER 10




THE DIVINE GLORIES


(Vibhuti Yoga)





“I am the silence of things secret, the wisdom of the wise.”





1 Krishna speaks: “I notice, O Warrior, that your heart delights in My words of wisdom, so I will elaborate.




2 “Neither the gods nor the great sages really know My beginning. As I am the origin of them all, My glory remains only partially known to them. Like children who repeatedly ask about their parents’ birth and childhood, they can never fully understand, no matter how much they inquire.




3 “Some wise ones intuit from glimpses and partial knowledge that I, the Supreme Godhead, am the source of all creation. Thus enlightened, they eagerly join their lives to Me and are freed from misdeeds.



4-5 “Certain godly attributes of ordinary humans are My creation. I am in all living beings as the following qualities: intellect, patience, wisdom (knowing Atma), peace of mind, self-restraint, control of ego, discrimination (distinguishing Real from not-Real), equanimity, nonharm to others, austerity (purification), self-discipline ( tapas), charitable giving, and other positive traits. All these human refinements proceed from Divinity; all are aspects of God expressed in diverse ways.

6 “From My mind were born the seven great sages of antiquity, the four elders, and the fourteen officials (manus). The sages symbolize planes of consciousness; the elders stand for humanity’s progenitors; the manus are symbolic of the group of administrators empowered to operate the universe. Everything issues from Me.”





Knowing God’s Glories, You Love Him





7 “Knowing these mystical details, you glimpse My Divine power. You know that whatever you sense or perceive in the entire cosmos is that power, and you therefore know that you could no more be separate from Me than you could be separate from your very life.




8 “Wise yogis love Me ceaselessly. They know that the love they are experiencing for Me is Me, for I am Love, Arjuna. Just as the good farmer puts all his attention on to the soil, concentrating his mind fully on cultivating the land, yogis give their minds and hearts fully to the Divine, knowing that God alone is the source of everything.




9 “With their attention and life vitality flowing to Me, absorbed in Me, these yogis take delight in speaking of Me with others of like mind. Nothing is dearer to anyone than their life, Arjuna, and I am life! Devoting one’s life to Me brings boundless contentment.



10-11 “To those who give Me their whole hearts I confer buddhi (beyond worldly intellect), the power of discriminating between the Real and not-Real. As familiarity with My power and glory grows they are ever more ardently drawn toMe. I am their wisdom, Arjuna. Out of compassion I choose to dwell in their hearts, and from there I dispel dark ignorance with the light of knowing that they are the Divinity within.”

12-15 Arjuna, in awe, begins to review his dawning understanding of God’s power and glories. “Dearest Krishna! You are the Godhead, the Supreme Presence! In Your manifested (visible) form You are the entire universe; in Your unmanifested (invisible) form You exist as the Godhead, Pure Consciousness.

“You are the underlying essence of all things, the origin and the dwelling place of everything visible and invisible in this universe. You are all of nature, and yet You are beyond that, everlasting. You are everywhere in everything as the Omnipresent. Those who have used special intuitive powers to understand and reach You, extol this.





“Now from Your own lips You are confirming it! Ah, and yet Your coming in this human body remains unknown to even the gods! You alone know Your glory in its entirety.





16-18 “Krishna, please tell me more about Your Divine glories. Tell me how I can develop constant awareness of You. Tell me again, O Divine One, of Your powers and attributes, for I never grow weary of hearing of them.”

19 Krishna replies, “Very well O warrior friend. Absorption in the attributes of the Divine is as good as absorption in Divinity itself. But because all the splendors of nature are attributes of My majesty, I will only give you a glimpse of a few. From this partial knowledge you may infer My infinitude.

20 “I am the innermost True Self, the Atma seated in the hearts of all beings. And I am the beginning, middle, and end of all beings.

21 “Of the deities presiding over light, I am the one for January, loved by all for turning the world’s course toward warmth. Of the wind gods who bring immense good in the world, I am the whirlwind. Of the daytime luminaries I am the radiant sun, and of the lights of the night I am the moon.

22 “Of the ancient scriptures I am the foremost, the Sama Veda.* Of the secondary gods I am Indra, the chief among them. Of the sense organs I am the mind that records all sensations. Of the numerous levels of life awareness that exist in all life-forms, I am Pure Consciousness.

23 “Of the eleven deities of destruction I am Shiva, destroyer of evil in the mind, who brings humanity’s lasting welfare. And I am Rudra, who brings grace to humanity through sorrow. Of the celestial beings who acquire and hoard wealth (Yakshas and Rakshasas), I am their king, Kubera, the lord of fabulous wealth. Of the eight elements in the structure of nature (earth, fire, water, air, space, mind, intellect, and ego), I am fire, the one who brings warmth and life. And of all mountains I am Mount Meru, which in the human structure equates with the life force in the spinal column.

24 “Of the high spiritual teachers who administer the code of conduct, know Me to be Brihaspati, the Chief Priest, Holy even among the gods. Among the warrior-chiefs I am Skanda, who leads the world to victory over the demons. Of all the bodies of water I am the ocean, into which all the rest merge.

25 “Among the rishis (seers) I am Bhrigu, ever in the highest plane of superconsciousness. Of sacrifices I am the most potent, japa, repetition of the name of the Divine. Of all utterances I am Om, the most sacred of sound symbols. And of fixed, stationary things I am the Himalayas.

26 “Of the trees, Arjuna, I am the holy fig tree (Ashvatta, the peepul tree), which represents the ‘upside-down’ tree of life with its roots above in spirit and its branches below in the earth. Among the most spiritually enlightened Divinities I am Narada, the foremost of those who teach the principle of unity amidst the world’s vast diversity. Of the celestial beings I am their king, Chitraratha. Of those high-perfected souls (siddhas) I am Kapila, the best of the best.

27 “Of horses I am Ucchiasravas, the nectar-born one. Of elephants I am Airavata, the one from the sea of milk. And of all humans, I am born as royalty, the monarch.

28 “Of weapons I am God’s thunderbolt, which descends on wickedness. Of cows I am Kamadhenu, the celestial milk cow of cheerful and willing mind with the power to satisfy all requirements of life. Among instincts I am the procreative urge. Of snakes I am Vasuki, god of snakes, symbol of kundalini, the coiled up reservoir of cosmic energy in each person.

29 “Among nonpoisonous snakes I am Ananta, symbol of the five elements of nature, on whom I rest. Of water deities I am Varuna, their king. I am the presiding deity of the departed ancestors (Aryama). And of the controllers of the universe I am Yama, the god of death.

30 “Of those who defy evil, iniquity, and injustice, I am Prahlada, who is virtuous even though he is the son of the sworn enemy of the gods. Among those who keep records I am the unfailing reckoner, Time itself. Of animals I am the lion. Of birds I am the Lord’s eagle, Garuda.

31 “Of the four purifiers in nature—earth, water, fire, and air—I am the wind, which purifies the other purifiers. Of those who wield deadly weapons I am Rama, who uses his weapon only for the good of humanity. Of all fish I am the shark, the most powerful. Among rivers I am Ganges with its sanctifying water.

32 “Of all things created, Arjuna, I am the beginning, the middle, and end. Of all sciences I am spiritual knowledge — Atma knowledge — the science of Self that makes ignorance vanish. Of all humanity’s instruments for inquiry and debate, I am pure logic.

33 “Of the sum total of all sound in the cosmos I am the letter A. In grammar I am the compound word, the most powerful of words. As I am time itself, I am without beginning and end. I mete out the karma of all beings, and thus am called the Disburser-Whose-Face-Is-Turned-Everywhere.

34 “I am the certain death that devours all, and I am also the seed of all that are to be. Of the qualities that, due to their grace and tenderness, are termed ‘female,’ I am fame and fortune, sweet speech, memory, intelligence, steadfast perseverance, loyalty, and forgiveness.

35 “Of the great Sama Vedas I am the best (Brihat Saman). Of poetic meters I am the foremost, the Gayatri adoration. Of the months, I am Margasirsha (parts of November-December), the most favorable time for spiritual practice. Of the seasons, I am the flowery spring.

36 “Among deceitful practices I am the roll of the dice. I am the splendor and radiance of the physically strong. Of that which takes humanity forward, I am effort. Of the three constituents of nature I am goodness (sattva).

37 “Among the Vrishni clan I am Krishna. Among the Pandavas I am Arjuna. Among the great, God-realized sages I am Vyasa, known as an incarnation of Divinity. Among the omniscient seers (kavis) I am Usana, the foremost of them.

38 “Among those who punish others I am the scepter, the symbol of measured justice. I am the art of statesmanship in those who seek victory by noble means. I am the silence of things secret. I am the wisdom of the wise.

39 “O Arjuna, beloved comrade, I am the source of everything in creation, the origin of all beings, all lives. In fact, I am whatever can be thought, imagined, or conceived. Nothing in this world, animate or inanimate, can exist without Me.

40-41 “There is no end to My Divine manifestations (vibhutis). What I have described is but a tiny glimpse into My glories. Whatever is beautiful, mighty, or glorious in this world has emanated from just a part of My infinite power.

42 “And finally, Arjuna, as this variety of details is of little use to you, just know that I, Brahman, exist, and that I stand holding this entire creation by a small fraction of My Supreme Glory.”

* Sama is the essence of other vedas set to music.The vedas comprise a mass of Divine knowledge in the form of scores of thousands of mystical and spiritual chants and aphorisms.





CHAPTER 11




THE COSMIC VISION


(Visvarupa Darsana Yoga)





“Everywhere I look, there You are.”





1-2 Arjuna sighs, his eyes glistening. “Thank You, Krishna, for this wondrous revelation of Your glories; it has removed my delusion. Thank You for Your detailed account of the evolution and dissolution of beings, and for Your exquisite description of Your splendor.

3-4 “I now know that You are what You say You are, Divine One, but I would like to actually see You in Your true God form, rather than just this Krishna body. If appropriate, and if I am worthy, please show me now.”

5-7 Krishna says, “You are worthy, Arjuna. I will have you behold millions of My shapes, forms, and colors, for naught exists outside Me. And I will have you see within Me the many classes of celestial beings and more marvels not previously revealed. And you will view the entire creation of animate and inanimate beings concentrated within the Cosmic Me, and witness whatever else your inner thoughts may bring.”





A Thousand Suns:


Krishna Reveals His Wondrous Cosmic Form





8 “But you cannot perceive any of this with human eyes composed of natural elements and thus able to grasp only physical nature. I will have to grant you special eyes to see beyond that. So now, using Divine vision, behold My Divine Cosmic Form.”



9-11 Back in the chambers of the old blind king, Sanjaya begins describing the unfolding, his eyes wide in amazement. “O King!” Sanjaya exclaims, “Lord Krishna is all at once a marvelous sight: thousands of facial features, countless mouths and eyes, clothes adorned with ornaments of beauty never seen before. He’s holding many weapons uplifted as symbols of His infinite powers, showing Himself arrayed in heavenly garments, garlands of flowers — I can even smell His celestial perfumes. He seems to be facing in all directions!

12 “It is impossible to describe in earthly words the dazzling light emanating from Him — it is as if a thousand suns were suddenly blazing in the sky; even that is insufficient tribute to the splendor and brilliance of His aura.

13 “Arjuna is now ‘seeing’ the entire universe, with all its myriad forms, within Krishna’s cosmic body — planets, distant stars, living beings, multitudes of animals, the vast plant kingdom — all expressions of the same consciousness that lives within the Divine One. The celestial worlds are also there for Arjuna to see; all the regions within and without are all united, concentrated at once within this vision of the Supreme One; all contained within the one being, the Divinity of Divinities.”

14-15 Arjuna gasps, “It’s awesome, Krishna! I bow my head in reverence to You. I can hardly find my voice. I … I see things I’ve never seen or heard about or even conceived. I see all the deities, O Divine One, and all kinds of living creatures within Your being. I see all the multitudes of lesser deities and animals that You earlier proclaimed to exist. I see all the seers and saints, and celestial serpents — all these beings are contained in You!

16-17 “But I cannot see to the far reaches of You, Krishna. I see no limits to Your Cosmic God form, no boundaries or demarcation points to Your spectrum of existence. I see countless eyes and arms, mouths, and bellies, but I find no end or beginning to it all. It simply is, without any restrictions of space or time or thought.

“I perceive crowns, and all the tools and symbols of Your rule over the worlds. The luminosity surrounding You is so brilliant it’s hard on even these Divine eyes that You granted me.





18 “From all this I can only conclude that You are indeed the Imperishable Supreme Being, the one and only thing to be known. You are the ultimate refuge for all, the guardian and support for the universe. You are the very basis of the universe’s functioning, what is called the Eternal Dharma. You are the everlasting Cosmic Spirit (Purusha). I am now convinced of these truths, O beloved Krishna.

19 “And I see You as birthless and deathless with total, absolute power and strength, as if possessing a million arms. Your mouth is the fire that warms the universe, and Your radiance lights it as though the sun and moon were Your eyes.

20 “Your vast, limitless presence fills all the space between heaven and earth, and extends far beyond all that. You are all-pervasive! I also see fierceness and terror in You, Krishna, and I watch beings in all the three worlds* tremble.

21-22 “Hordes of deities swirl around You and enter into Your being. Some are awestruck and fearfully extol Your praises. Legions of other celestial beings sing rapturous hymns in praise of Your awesome purifying powers. Even these high beings gaze at Your fiery eyes in amazement, unable to gauge Your universal figure in its entirety.”





Krishna Reveals the Battle’s Cosmic Inevitability




23-25 “O Krishna, it’s breathtaking. No matter how far I turn in any direction, high or low, side to side, I cannot see an end to Your form. All I see is Your vastness brushing the sky and horizons; I lose my sense of direction and feel utterly lost and bewildered. And now, seeing Your measureless might, it’s as though millions of arms and teeth are set to devour everything in sight.

“I perceive all the worlds and creatures become as I feel inside, frightened and terror-struck at Your fury. When I crane my neck to look upon Your gaping mouths and grinding teeth I am filled with horror; my peace of mind flees from me. Be gracious, O Krishna, please show mercy!





26-30 “I watch all the enemy forces — the sons of the old blind king, generals, heroes, relatives, others who allied themselves with them — all are rushing headlong into Your immensity as though being devoured. And I watch as vast numbers of our own soldiers and warrior-chiefs also rush heedless into the maw. I hear the frightful cries as these forces are ground up and crushed within You. Like flooded rivers rushing toward the ocean, the heroes on both sides are scurrying, stumbling to their awful fate in You; like moths flitting purposely into the flame, they rush to their doom in You. It is as though You are swallowing up the worlds and licking Your lips, O Lord. Your destructiveness is as a fierce blaze filling the sky, permeating the universe!

31 “When You are so ruinous and fierce, the reality of You abruptly hides from me. I suddenly don’t know who You are or what Your purpose is. Who are You? Help me find my balance!”

32 Krishna answers, “I am Time, Arjuna — and now, here at this place of battle, I am the mighty world-destroying Time. With or without you, the warriors are arrayed to fight, and whether on the righteous or corrupt side, they are readied for their ruin and must die. The destruction of enemies is inevitable. It is not possible for an individual person to avert the design of Divinity.

33 “Therefore, attack, O mighty warrior, conquer your evil-doing enemies and win kingdom, wealth, and fame. I have willed to wipe out wickedness and have therefore already slain these warriors. Your actions will only be My outward cause, and you are merely My instrument.

34 “Although they are indeed brave, nevertheless smite them, for they are already doomed. Fight and you will win. Killing them is not contrary to dharma (righteousness).”

35 Arjuna interrupts, “I am shaking in fear, Divine One,” he says. “I bow my head and join my palms to You. My voice is so choked and my lips so trembling I can hardly speak.

36-37 “It is indeed appropriate, O Divinity, that the world reveres You, that the celestials bow to You and the demons flee from You. How could they not be in awe of You? You are the Cause of the Cause, the Eternal that existed even before Brahma the Creator. You transcend time itself, space itself, and even causation! You are the Supreme Divinity of all deities, the Lord of all gods. You are That within which the universe dwells. You are the Everlasting. You are That which is and That which is not, and even beyond both That and Not-That; You are rightly called the Supreme Absolute Reality.

38 “What else can rapturous souls do but extol You, the first and highest among gods, the most ancient spirit? Within You the cosmos rests in safety, and into You it will dissolve. You are at once the Knower and known, both the Goal and our striving toward it. Indeed, Your form fills and overflows the universe.”





Arjuna, Overwhelmed, Seeks Forgiveness




39-40 “You are the wind itself, Krishna, not merely the lord of it. You are death itself, fire, water, and the moon itself, not merely the lord over them. You are the father of all born, and the sire of the fathers. Please accept my upwelling of devotion to You. I salute You a thousand times. Take these salutes, Divine One, from every quarter of Your creation. Infinite and measureless is Your might, and boundless is Your glory! Everywhere I look, there You are. Indeed, You are all there is.

41-42 “I haven’t really comprehended Your greatness until now, O Divine One. In the past I carelessly called You by Your familiar names and took You to be merely a fellow mortal, calling You simply ‘friend.’ If I have shown disrespect while we played as children or while resting or eating or in the company of others, please forgive me. I hereby take on a most reverent attitude.

43 “Who can match Your might? You are the source of all things in this world, animate or inanimate. You are the adored Master. None in all three worlds is equal to You.

44 “I prostrate myself before You and ask You to forgive me! As a friend forgives a comrade or a father forgives a son, or a mother forgives a child, or a lover forgives a beloved — please grant me pardon, Divine One.

45-46 “I am delighted to have been shown this rare vision, but I’m still filled with fear by it. Please have mercy on me, show me You as You were before. Let me see the familiar shape I knew — not with a thousand arms but with two — or even the four arms You occasionally seemed to have due to Your great strength.”





Only Through My Grace and Your Love




47-48 Krishna responds: “Through My Divine power and grace you have received this vision of My cosmic form. No other has seen this but you. I showed you this because I love you, Arjuna. This vision cannot be won through spiritual practices, study, service, rituals, or severe penance. Only through My grace has this sight of Me come, and it has come only to you.

49 “So why fear, Arjuna? Look, here I am as I appeared before. Be alarmed no more. Be happy, take courage.”

50-51 Lord Krishna reverts to His human form, a slight smile on His lips. Arjuna says, “O Krishna, I am very happy to see You back, and I’m beginning to feel calmer, like my old self.”

52 Krishna says, “The cosmic form you saw is extremely rare. Even celestial beings — those who are more spiritually elevated than humans but with no higher knowledge of the Godhead — even they yearn to see My form.

53 “Neither by study of the scriptures nor by personal austerities for purification, neither by giving gifts to the deserving nor by performing rituals nor by making offerings to Me can anyone behold Me as you have, Arjuna. Those spiritual activities — studying, gift giving, rituals, and so forth — are conducive to purifying the mind, but they will not bring the vision of Me.

54 “And yet, through unswerving, single-minded love (ananya bhakti), humans can know the essence of My supreme glory and can enter into My Being. How? Pure devotion, Arjuna. In a constant state of deep love for God, a true devotee recognizes nothing but God.

55 “So therefore, O Prince, dedicate all your actions to Me. Work for Me alone with no attachments or selfish desires. Make Me your exclusive goal. Take refuge in Me. Love Me wholeheartedly and bear no malice toward any creature. Then you will reach Me.”

* Referring to Earth, in-between planes, the heavens; and the three states of consciousness: the waking, dream, and deep sleep states.





CHAPTER 12




THE PATH OF LOVE


(Bhakti Yoga)





“I love the one who is beyond ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ unperturbed by pain and not elated by pleasure.”





1 Arjuna speaks again: “My interest is aroused now but I have a question. You say that only by unswerving love and worship can a devotee attain oneness with God. But some worship the invisible, formless God (Nirguna Brahman) and others worship the visible God with form (Saguna Brahman). Which of these two aspects is easiest? Which will melt your heart more?”




2 Krishna answers, “I am pleased with either path, but worshiping Saguna Brahman, the one you can see, is right for you at this point, Arjuna. Setting your heart steadily on the visible aspect of Me and becoming saturated with devotion and faith will lead you quickly and surely to Me, the Godhead.



3-4 “As for those who worship Nirguna Brahman (God without form or name), if they truly subdue their senses, maintain a calm mind, and work for the good of all beings, they also come to Me. But realize, Arjuna, that Nirguna means not of nature; this Brahman is indefinable and unmanifested, invisible, not materialized. The senses therefore have no access to it, there is nothing to which it can be likened.


5 “Devotees of the nonmaterialized Godhead have a steeper climb. It is extremely difficult for a person in a physical form to really understand the formless. Ordinary people identify themselves with their own physical body and cannot help but conceptualize God as also being in some sort of body. To deeply love the formless God one must be free from one’s own body consciousness, and this state is not attainable by many.



“But keep in mind, Arjuna, that worshiping Divinity in a form will help for only a while. Those whose ultimate aim is full liberation must sooner or later give up attachment to the body. Without this, the Atma stage of spiritual development cannot be attained.”





The Order of Devotion




6-7 “But know, Arjuna, that I quickly come to those who offer Me all their actions, set their minds on Me with unswerving devotion, worship Me as their dearest delight, and takeMe as their one and only goal in life. Because they so dearly love Me, I save them from the sorrow of death and endless waves of rebirth.


8 “It is true that one is where one’s mind is. So fix your mind on Me. Be absorbed in Me alone. Focus your devotion on Me. Still yourself in Me. Without a doubt you will then come and live within Me.




9 “If you are unable to become absorbed in Me, wean your mind away from the world and reach Me by constantly concentrating on Me. I know this may seem impossible, but as I said, the ‘impossible’ can be made possible through regular practice (abhyasa yoga).



10 “If you find that you are not disciplined enough to concentrate in this manner, transform all your worldly actions into worship. Do them forMy sake. Turn your force of habit to your own advantage; make a habit of dedicating all your actions to Divinity. In this way you become My instrument and your mind gradually becomes purified, which will lead you to Me.

11 “But if you cannot even do that, then pursue an alternative n that is equally powerful. Take refuge in Me. Subdue your mind and give up desire for the fruits of your actions.

12 “Knowledge is better than mere performance of rituals. Meditation is better than knowledge. Abandoning the fruits of one’s acts (tyaga), is better than meditation. Why? Because peace immediately follows the giving up of expectations.”





The Most Loved Devotees




13-14 “Arjuna, I will now enumerate the marks of the devotee I most dearly love. I love the one who harbors no ill will toward any living being, who returns love for hatred, who is friendly and compassionate toward all. I love the devotee who is beyond ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ unperturbed by pain and not elated by pleasure, who possesses firm faith, is forgiving, ever contented and ever meditating on Me.

15 “I love the peaceful devotee who is neither a source of 15 agitation in the world nor agitated by the world. I love those who are free of fear, envy, and other annoyances that the world brings, who accept the knocks that come their way as blessings in disguise.

16 “I love those who do their worldly duties unconcerned and untroubled by life. I love those who expect absolutely nothing. Those who are pure both internally and externally are also very dear to Me. I love the devotees who are ready to be My instrument, meet any demands I make on them, and yet ask nothing of Me.

17 “I love those who do not rejoice or feel revulsion, who do not grieve, do not yearn for possessions, are not affected by the bad or good things that happen to and around them and yet are full of devotion to Me. They are dear to Me because they live in the Self (Atma), not in the commotion of the world.

18-19 “I love devotees whose attitudes are the same toward friend or foe, who are indifferent to honor or ignominy, heat or cold, praise or criticism—who not only control their talking but are silent within. Also very dear to Me are those generally content with life and unattached to things of the world, even to home. I love those whose sole concern in life is to love Me. Indeed, these and all the others I mentioned are very, very dear to Me.

20 “Hold Me as your highest goal. Live your life in accordance with the immortal wisdom I have taught you here, and practice this wisdom with great faith and deep devotion. Surrender your mind and heart completely to Me. Then I will love you dearly, and you will go beyond death to immortality.”





Part 3





ATTAINING


LIBERATION


NOW





CHAPTER 13




THE FIELD AND ITS KNOWER: DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN MATTER AND SPIRIT


(Kshetra Kshetrajna Vibhaga Yoga)





“When the body falls… it is the spirit that remains standing.”





1 Arjuna asks, “If Divinity is everything in the world, i Krishna, then what is the difference between the world and Divinity? How can one distinguish between one’s worldly body and godly soul? What is the difference between physical matter and the world of Spirit? And is there any benefit in learning this?”



Krishna responds, “These are important questions, Arjuna. When you know the true nature of the material world your grief is destroyed; when you understand the true nature of the Spirit, bliss is acquired.





“The term field denotes one’s physical body and everything else in the material world. The Knower of the Field signifies the intelligent principle that resides in, but is not really a part of, the body and all matter. This indwelling intelligence is the mysterious entity within that is close enough to watch what goes on in the ‘field’ and yet stands somewhat separate from it. It is also referred to as soul, or Atma.





2 “Arjuna, I am the Knower of the Field, the Indweller in everybody and everything. I am the innermost Self, the soul, the Atma in all beings. The ability to discriminate between the field and its Knower is the utmost highest knowledge, as it requires a true understanding of both secular things and sacred knowing. So listen carefully.”





The Field (Prakriti, the World of Nature)





3 “I will now further explain what the field — the world of nature — consists of, where it came from, and why and how it operates. Then I will tell you more of the Knower of the Field and the powers of the Knower.




4 “Though quite intricate, this is a wondrous inquiry, Arjuna. The great sages in prehistoric times discovered these profound truths through meditation and precise reasoning. Down through the ages they expressed them through chants and aphorisms (vedas), carefully balancing their deep love for God with rigorous questioning and understanding so that these truths would appeal jointly to the heart and the head.



5-6 “First, understand that truly knowing the field, the natural world (prakriti), is not simply a process of listing the myriad items that comprise it. To understand nature itself it is necessary to know something about human consciousness. To know something is to be conscious of it. You become conscious of things in the world (that is, you ‘know’ them) through the mechanisms of perception in your nervous system — sight, hearing, feeling, mind, and so forth. But the nervous system is itself a part of nature; that which you use to know the world, nature, is also nature. Thus, that which is known cannot really be separated from the knower of it.

“Also understand, Arjuna, that all of the natural world, all of prakriti, originates in consciousness itself — the One Supreme Consciousness, Divinity. In the natural world Supreme Consciousness separates into many forces both physical and mental — endlessly combining and recombining. Everything known or knowable stems from Consciousness. Knowing this, one really knows the field.





“The following are the twenty-five components of nature, the field:





“First, there is the ‘unmanifested’ (the mahat, literally ‘the great cause’). This is a latent reasoning force, the first glimmering of an ego sense in the cosmos, an early, raw capacity to differentiate and decide — like a seed that drinks in moisture and is about to swell in size prior to sprouting. It is this ‘unmanifested’ that gives rise to mind, matter, and energy.





“From this first comes the higher mind (intellect, buddhi), the discriminatory faculty, the ability to distinguish between Real and not-Real (between the spiritual Self and worldly self).





“From buddhi comes the ego that we know, the principle of individuation (ahamkara), which causes one to be aware of one’s self as an apparently separate entity.





“From the ego principle is produced the lower mind (manas, usually referred to simply as ‘mind’). Its job is to receive through the senses and process the messages received from the field, and carry them to the intellect. Included here are certain subtle modifications of mind: desire and aversion, pleasure and pain, the experience of one’s physical body, intelligence (the power to interpret), and the mental experience of physical stamina.





“Emerging from this level of mind are the ten sense organs (indriyas), which are not physical organs per se but powerful sensory mechanisms or capabilities. There are two sets: the five ‘organs’ of perception (hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell), and the five organs of action (vocal cords, hands, feet, the reproductive and generative organs, and elimination organs).





“From these ten sense organs develop the five so-called ‘objects of the senses,’ which are not solid objects but the subtle essences in the world that attract the senses. These ‘sense objects’ are sound (audibility, resonance, sonority); feeling (tactility, texture, tangibility); aspect (the look of something — shape, color, brightness); taste (gustation, flavor, savoriness); and smell (olfaction, odors, scents, fragrances).





“Lastly produced are the five age-old categories of components into which the mind organizes all worldly matter — the five basic elements of earth, water, fire, air, and space.





“Those are the twenty-four constituents of inert matter that comprise the field. There is actually one more: the mysterious vital force, Atma, that infuses life into all this material. This makes up the total twenty-five.”





The Knower of the Field


(Purusha, Cosmic Consciousness)





7 “Arjuna, I will now turn from the field to the qualities of the Knower of the Field. This intuitive knowledge is beyond intellectual knowing. It comes through possessing distinctive virtues and outlooks that, taken together, give rise to such knowing.



“The Knower of the Field is humble and harmless. Be like this Knower. Know in your heart that all excellence emanates only from the Divine. Be gentle. Be forgiving of any hurt received. Be upright and harmonized in thought, word, and deed. Serve your teacher and imbibe his or her good traits and disposition. Be steadfast in your spiritual development. Be pure of mind — escape the worldly deluge of mental pollution, because purity is indispensable to your spiritual growth. Be ever in control of your body, mind, and senses.





8 “Be detached from egoism, selfishness, and the attractions of the world. Do not see yourself as this body-mind complex that suffers the pains of bondage to birth, aging, death, and rebirth. Know instead that you are Atma, the Eternal Reality beyond all that.




9 “Meet the inevitable good and bad of life with an even mind. To no one or no thing be a slave! Be tied neither to possessions nor family. Love and fulfill your responsibilities to spouse, children, home, and kin, but do not become so identified with them that you forget Atma, your True Self Within.



10 “The way to do all this is through loving Me with your heart undistracted. Be ever intent on Divinity. Center all your thoughts on Me. Turn your back on social life and the commotion of the crowds. Prefer for now the company of like-minded persons, and then, as you advance, sever even from them — but not as a hermit, as a detached yogi.

11 “Grow in wisdom through diligent inquiry into the nature of Self and non-Self. Only Divinity is Truth, Arjuna, and Atma is truly Divinity. This I declare to be true knowledge. To seek anything else is to seek ignorance.”





Knowing the Knower




12 Krishna continues, “I will now tell you what you need to know to go beyond death to immortality. The goal of spiritual wisdom is to realize — to know in your heart — the Supreme Godhead that is both being and nonbeing, both manifested and unmanifested.

13-15 “The Godhead dwells in all creation, in all hands and feet, in the heads of all beings as their eyes, ears, and mouths. It is Itself devoid of senses, yet Its subtle powers perform the tasks of the senses. This Divinity is totally independent, yet It supports all things. The Godhead is beyond the three gunas of nature, yet It is the very consciousness in them. It is inside and outside all beings. It is both formless and with form. It moves and does not move. Its subtlety and mystery is incomprehensible to the nonpurified mind. To the ignorant the Godhead is distant; to the knowledgeable It is very near.

16 “Divinity is subtle and beyond comprehension. It appears to be many but is one undivided. Divinity sends creation out from within Itself; It protects creation, preserves it, and dissolves it.

17 “As the Lighter of all lights, the Godhead, Brahman, dwells in each and every heart, beyond the darkness of ignorance. It is the True Self Within, the sole goal of knowledge; and indeed It is Knowledge Itself.

18 “That is the truth about the field and its Knower (about matter and Spirit, body and Soul). Devoted people who grow to understand this profound, mysterious truth are worthy to be united with Me.”





The Union of the Field and Its Knower




19 “Also know, Arjuna, that both nature and Spirit, both prakriti (the field) and Purusha (Pure Consciousness), are without beginning. Know that all of physical nature evolves from Consciousness. And know that all of nature and all the attributes in nature are nothing but the permutation and combination of the three guna-qualities of nature I mentioned earlier: calm goodness (sattva), passionate action (rajas), and dark lethargy (tamas). And know that nature (prakriti) alone is the source of everything in the physical universe.

20 “The cause of your body is nature (prakriti), but the cause of your aliveness — your experience of being an individual, feeling joy and sorrow in a particular body — is Spirit (Purusha).

21 “This Spirit-self (jiva) that takes residence in a material body forgets its true nature (Atma) and mistakenly identifies itself with that body. Thus it becomes attached to nature, to the gunas. While the individual is a mixture of all three guna qualities, the one to which it is most attached predominates, and the individual becomes that type of person, experiencing the behaviors, sensations, and delusions that are peculiar to that quality — becoming a generally calm (sattvic) person, an active (rajasic) person, or a lethargic (tamasic) person. As the individual is now a part of nature, it is bound to participate in repeated births and deaths, the painful destiny of all matter.

22 “And yet, remember, Arjuna, that the Spirit (Purusha energy) dwelling in the individual body as Atma is truly Brahman, the Godhead. This Supreme Being is spoken of as the following: the Observer who watches and referees the game of life, the Approver who permits it all to happen, the Supporter who helps it all to happen, the Enjoyer who experiences it all with gusto but knows it is a game, and most important, the Master who holds complete dominion over all the events though being unaffected by any of them.

23 “When you have directly experienced the Godhead (Brahman), you will not be born again because then you will truly know that the Divine One is beyond all this natural world of prakriti and gunas. The fire of this great knowledge will burn out all your karmas, and there will be no more motivating force within you to create another birth. Thus unburdened, you (in this state, called jivanmukti) will duly perform all your duties in the world and yet watch life in total peace.

24 “The paths to this great knowledge are several. Some realize it by building mind power through meditation (dhyana yoga); others do it by sharpening the intellect through acquisition of knowledge (jnana yoga); and yet others through performing selfless action (karma yoga). Whichever the path, if successfully walked it eventually develops pure, single-minded love for God (bhakti yoga, union with God through devotion). When one reaches this level of absolute Divine Love one reaches the End.

25 “For those unable to grasp any of these paths there is another way. By diligently and faithfully listening to their spiritual teachers and worshiping the Divine as instructed, they too will eventually pass beyond the wheel of death and rebirth.

26 “Return for a moment, Arjuna, to consideration of the field. Remember that whatever comes into existence, whether thing or being, is a result of the union between matter and Spirit (the field and the Knower).

27 “When the matter part of this union falls in death, the spirit part remains standing. Ordinary people do not see the Spirit within and therefore think that it is their own self that dies. Only when you see the undying within the dying do you really see the Truth.

28 “Indeed, true seers, perceiving Divinity in everyone, do no harm to anyone. The ones who don’t perceive this unity separate themselves from others, seeing some as friends and others as foes. These are the ones who do harm. It is this illusion of separateness that causes all evils perpetrated by humanity! How can one who really knows Atma injure the same Atma in another? As I have often repeated, the true seer of Atma reaches the Godhead and leaves death and rebirth behind.

29 “Seers of Truth are aware that all action is done by the body and not by the Spirit dwelling in the body (by prakriti, not Purusha). They know that the body belongs to nature, and Atma belongs to Spirit. Thus they understand that the True Self (Atma) is actionless, is never the doer.

30 “You must ultimately realize this tremendous lesson: All creatures, although appearing separate, are truly only one; all beings emanate from the Godhead and are united in the Godhead. The one who truly learns this becomes the Godhead and thereby attains liberation.

31 “The True Self (Atma), as I have said, has no beginning or end. It is beyond prakriti. Though dwelling in the field (the body), this Knower of the Field does not act. It is therefore untouched by the fruits of action and untainted by karma, good or bad.

32 “This True Self Within is indeed mysterious, Arjuna. It is subtler than the subtlest. As water, when it is steam (its subtle state), defies being dirtied by its surroundings, Atma is never tainted though it dwells in every creature.

33 “Just as the single sun illuminates the whole world, the sole Knower of the Field lights up the entire field. All beings great and small, saint and sinner, high and low, get their light — their consciousness — from this one source.

34 “Finally, Arjuna, know that the goal is not to get entangled in the world, but to use the world to reach Divinity. Use your eye of wisdom, your intuitive faculty, to distinguish between the field and the Knower. Then you can actually cut yourself free from the field, from bondage to the worldly, and reach Me, the Supreme Goal.”





CHAPTER 14




GOING BEYOND THE THREE FORCES OF NATURE


(Gunatraya Vibhaga Yoga)





“ … beyond time, space, and circumstances to the place where the mind is tranquil and ego disappears.”





1 “Arjuna, I will now explain in more detail the very nature of nature (prakriti), and how the three gunas function within each individual’s life. The term guna refers not only to the three properties of nature but also to the corresponding three underlying attitudes of mind that shape all human behavior. When you know these secrets, you possess the spiritual wisdom that can take you beyond birth and death. Through this wisdom the sages were guided to supreme perfection.




2 “In fact, those who live by this wisdom definitely unite with Me and will not have to be reborn even when the cosmos is recreated at the dawn of a cycle.




3 “It is I who instills the seed of all births into the vast womb of nature ( prakriti). Nature in turn gives birth to the infinitely diverse temperaments of all creatures.




4 “Everything that is born, Arjuna, comes from this subtle union of Spirit and nature. Whatever forms are produced in any of the wombs of the universe, know that My nature (prakriti) is the cosmic mother of all creation, and that I am the seed-giving father.”





Gunas, the Three Strands of Nature





5 “All life evolves from the differentiating power of three forces or strands in nature: sattva (purity, light, calmness), rajas (passion, action), and tamas (ignorance, darkness, inertia).



“Everyone, Arjuna, has all three forces within them in differing proportions and will, as I have mentioned, exhibit the type of behavior that is in accord with their predominating guna. Thus, the gunas explain why you think, feel, speak, and act as you do. This is the entire map. The sattvic person (a rare type) will be calm and harmonized. Rajasic persons (certainly the majority) are full of restless energy. Tamasic people (also quite common) will be lethargic, indolent, and unmotivated to act.





“The word guna also means strand in a directly literal sense. Gunas are forces that weave together to form a strong rope that binds the Self (Atma, soul) to one’s worldly body and thus to life, death, and rebirth.





“The objective of life is to reshape one’s character upward in pursuit of a higher ideal — changing from indolence or inertia (tamas) into passionate effort (rajas), and then channeling that into calmness (sattva).





6 “Of these forces, sattva, being pure, provides an unobstructed 6 view of Atma. But even here a problem can arise when one finds pleasure in sacred knowledge and begins yearning for it. Any pleasure, even good pleasure, creates attachment and subsequent desire. All attachments, even golden ropes, bind the individual (jiva) to the pain and sadness of the material world.




7 “Desireful action is the very nature of rajas, the second guna. Desire goads one into action and creates a sense of doership in the mind. It spawns a thirst for acquiring and clinging to worldly things — to people and sensations that attract the senses. As fuel feeds fire, rajas breeds attachments to action and its fruit. This attachment turns on itself, bringing greed and greed’s close relative, anger.




8 “Tamas (literally darkness) is saturated with ignorance and instills nothing but indolence and stupor. This guna bewilders people, stealing their capacity for work (their rajasic energy) as well as their composure (their sattvic calmness).



9-10 “So, Arjuna, sattva ties the calm person to joy, rajas binds active doers to incessant activity, and tamas fastens indolent people to delusion and sloth. Over the course of a day all three gunas ebb and flow within each person. Sattva rises to the fore by overpowering rajas and tamas. Rajas rules when sattva and tamas are weak. Tamas prevails when the other two qualities lie dormant and yield to lethargy.

11-13 “One should be aware of which guna predominates. I will describe some of the signs: When sattva rises it is as if the light of the True Self is shining out through all your gates (senses). Your seeing is sharper, hearing is more acute, and thinking and actions steadier, more precise. When rajas takes over your personality it is as if impatience, greed, and longing have sprung to the forefront, as if your own restlessness is compelling you to action. Tamas has taken charge when your mind feels lazy, bewildered, and uncaring.

14-15 “The particular state of mind uppermost at the time of your death is the deciding factor of your next birth. If your soul departs when sattva is predominant, you go to the pure heavens of beings who know the Creator. If you die in a rajasic state — full of unfulfilled desires, excitement, fears, and sorrows — you are reborn into the wombs of people similarly driven. If you die in a tamasic mentality you depart in an unconscious state, only to be reborn into a situation of equal dullness and ignorance, perhaps even as a subhuman or lower animal.

16-17 “I repeat, Arjuna, always seek to move to the next higher level (from tamas to rajas to sattva), because the consequences of the various actions are clear. Sattvic actions result in wisdom, purity, and happiness. Rajasic activities always bring greed, anger, and great pain. Tamasic behavior leads to ignorance and dull inertia.

“But also know that the anger and pain of driven, rajasic people may be heaven sent, because nothing motivates a person to mend his or her ways as much as the misery that always accompanies desire-driven action. Suffering is the training ground where one shapes good character and right conduct (dharma). It is dharma (living a truth-based life) that lifts one to the serenity of sattva.





18 “Those who live in sattva rise upwards, whether in this world or the next. Those stuck in rajas stay in the middle, ever caught up in earthly activity. Those mired in tamas sink even lower.

19-20 “Remember, Arjuna, the gunas are nature (prakriti), 19-20 and all actions, whether sattvic, rajasic, or tamasic, take place in nature. All things in nature are just permutations of the three strands, the guna forces — even the mind, senses, and objects that attract the senses are permutations of these three.

“The purpose of earthly life, as I have said, is to outgrow the two inferior gunas and reach the serenity of sattva — and then to ascend beyond even sattva. The person who climbs beyond all three guna states is in essence transcending nature itself, and is thereby freed of the natural body, and is thus liberated from the awful cycle of birth, decay, death, and rebirth. This person enters the realm of Pure Consciousness and attains the supreme bliss of My Being, Brahman, the Godhead.”





How to Transcend the Gunas




21 Arjuna asks, “What are the hallmarks of those jnanis (wise yogis) who have transcended the three gunas? How do they conduct themselves? And how do they rise beyond these entangling strands?”

22-23 “Good question,” Krishna says. “Those who transcend the gunas are in essence watchers, beyond the worldly. Although constantly aware of the inevitable cycle of birth, disease, senility, grief, and so forth, they dwell above it all and merely witness it. They feel no attraction or aversion to any of the gunas — no desire even for the calm joy of sattva or for the excitement of rajas, and no repulsion toward the lethargy of tamas. They have nothing to gain by adhering to any of these earthly behaviors and nothing to lose by turning from them. While the waves of guna forces ebb and flow, these transcended persons remain calm, steady, unaffected, unconcerned, and unmoved. As they do not tie their moods to guna-created circumstances, they cease being uplifted or depressed by their own likes or dislikes.

24-25 “Thus balanced in the face of pleasure and pain, these yogis are no longer a party to the machinations of the three forces within nature and in the body. They dwell always within Self, Atma. Dualities such as pleasure and pain, praise and blame no longer have any meaning. As they are established in this attitude of holy indifference, to them lumps of clay, stone, or gold are all the same. They have progressed beyond time, space, and circumstance, to the place where the mind is tranquil and ego disappears.

26 “The way to traverse the gunas is through steadfast practice of the three paths (yogas) I have prescribed: One, be thoroughly devoted to the Divine One (bhakti yoga); two, faithfully serve Divinity (karma yoga); and three, be constantly aware of this same Divinity in all others and in everything you do (jnana yoga).

27 “Finally, beloved Arjuna, be always cognizant that I, the Divine One, am the foundation of both the manifested and unmanifested Godhead; I am the imperishable, immutable Brahman above all, who dwells within all as Atma. I am eternal truth and everlasting bliss.”





CHAPTER 15




DEVOTION TO THE SUPREME SELF


(Purushottama Yoga)





“The one who grasps this great secret will become enlightened; all duties and missions in life and the goal of millions of years of evolution will have been achieved.”





1 Krishna pauses as though carefully weighing his next words. “Arjuna, let us now briefly delve into certain profound and esoteric truths regarding My most exalted nature and the highest goal of all, reaching My dwelling place. I will approach it through an analogy.



“Prakriti, the world of matter, can be likened to the mythical Ashvatta tree, a giant, upside-down fig tree with its roots high in God and its branches stuck in the mud below. Like the aspen, its leaves are constantly shivering, always in movement; and like the banyan, it sends its branches downward toward the earth rather than upward — and those branches become firmly rooted in the earthly.”





Ashvatta, the Tree of Worldly Life





2 “The Ashvatta, referred to as the tree of worldly life, is comprised of higher branches, closer to God, and lower ones at the worldly level. The tree’s buds and quaking leaves are likened to human senses, fed by the saplike powers of nature, the gunas. The downward branches, stuck deep, are attachments that bind the individual soul (jiva) to earthly existence. To understand the nature of this upside-down tree is to see the inverted way that humans perceive life.



3-4 “Although the origin and totality of this tree of worldly life may be beyond the ken of humanity, know that its branches stuck in the world must be cut by the ax of nonattachment. When you sever these attachments an attitude of sacred dispassion comes, which is the prerequisite for spiritual vision. Then, spiritual intuition supplants your usual seeing, and your whole spectacle of the universe undergoes a dramatic change.

“But cutting the root bonds is not enough. After the ax has done its work, you must seek the supreme goal of life, liberation from the cycle of rebirth.





Atma) reach that Supreme Goal. When they are free of pride and have slashed their attachments, when they have dropped their craving for pleasure and aversion to pain, then these clear-seeing ones enter the light of the Supreme Goal.

6 “That light is indeed bright beyond all light! Neither the sun, the moon, nor star, nor flash of lightning, nor fire lit on earth can shine in the self-luminescence of My realm. Once the individual soul achieves this ultimate enlightenment he or she is forever with Me and is never restored to a separate existence.”





The Jiva’s Journey





7 “I will now explain more about the individual soul (jiva). The Atma (a part of Divinity) enters into a body in the womb before birth; thus it enters the world of matter. It draws around itself the five senses, with the mind as the sixth. The mind and senses, remember, are prakriti, a part of nature.




8 “Like a breeze wafting the scent of perfume, the Atma, when it migrates from one body to the next, carries with it the mind and the senses. That means it brings along the intellect, the ego (sense of being a separate identity), and the lower mind; transferring thoughts and tendencies from previous lifetimes.




9 “The individual soul (jivatma), because it has drawn the senses around itself, experiences the pleasures, desires, and pains of the world.



10 “People who are unaware of the True Self Within (Atma), do not recognize this jiva in them that is using the senses. As the senses are limited to the mind level, they are incapable of comprehending Atma, which is above the mind. Yogis, however, possessing the eye of wisdom (intuitive faculty), do see Me, their Atmic Self within.

11 “To obtain this ‘eye of wisdom’ you must do two things: surrender your ego and purify your mind. Only by accomplishing both of these will you behold Me. Those with only halfhearted surrender or only partially purified minds are not granted the capacity to see their Atmic Self.”





God’s Immanence in All




12 “Remember, dear friend, that I am subtly inherent in everything, everything in the universe! I am the all-illuminating light of the sun, the light in the moon, the brilliance in fire — all light is Mine. I am even the consciousness of light, and indeed, I am the consciousness in the entire cosmos.

13 “A minute drop of My primordial energy (prana) entering the earth supports and sustains all beings. I become the life-giving sap that nourishes all plants (including all healing herbs). In fact, it is My energy that gives rise to all forms of matter and energy.

14 “I enter the bodies of living beings as the warmth of life. I am in their digestive systems as heat that turns food into strength. I am the in-going and out-going breath. These powers are aspects of My energy.

15 “I am in all hearts. I reside throughout the cosmos as consciousness. From Me comes knowledge, understanding, and memory. I bring all these powers, and I also take them away.

“Try to contemplate the vastness and mind-boggling impermanence of the entire physical universe, Arjuna, and you just begin to gather an idea of My absolute permanence. By ruminating on the utter immensity of the cosmos you begin to receive hints of the incomprehensible scope of My omnipresence. I am present everywhere in all this vastness.





“I am beauty and bliss, Arjuna. It is I of whom all the different scriptures in the world speak. In fact, it is I who authored them.





16 “There are two orders of beings in this world: mortal (temporal, perishable) beings and immortal (eternal, imperishable) Spirit. All creatures are perishable. The Spirit is imperishable.

17-18 “But distinct from and above both of these — higher than either mortals or Spirit, higher even than the highest deities — I exist as the Supreme Atma, the Immutable, Eternal, Imperishable Godhead. It is this utmost-level ‘I’ who pervades, and yet remains above and beyond all three worlds (earth, the in-between levels, and the heavens). As I transcend both the perishable and the imperishable, I am known in this aspect of Myself as the ‘Supreme Absolute Highest Self,’ or Purushottama.

19 “There is only one Reality, Arjuna, one! Those who know and see this Supreme level of Self in Me know and see the Truth. These enlightened souls devote themselves to Me with full hearts.

20 “I have revealed this most profound and esoteric of all truths to you. The one who grasps this great secret will become enlightened; all duties and missions in life and the goal of millions of years of evolution will have been achieved. There is no higher knowledge. That one has done what has to be done.”





CHAPTER 16




THE TWO DESTINIES: DIVINE OR DEGENERATE


(Daiva-Asura Sampad Vibhaga Yoga)





“ … the cardinal virtues and tendencies that reveal the real nature of human beings: their Divinity.”





1-3 “I can see your continuing interest, old friend, and will now describe the distinctive qualities and practices of people with Divine tendencies and degenerate (sometimes called ‘demonic’) tendencies. First, the Divine traits:

“Fearlessness, purity (of heart and emotions), steadfastness (in pursuit of Atma), charity (alms giving), and control of senses.





“Sacrifice (yajna, the spirit of giving), study of scriptures, purification (austerity, tapas, literally to ‘melt’ and recast), straightforwardness (integrity, sincerity), and noninjury (ahimsa, doing no mental, physical, or spiritual harm).





“Also on the list of godlike traits are: truthfulness, absence of anger, renunciation (turning away from worldly attachments), equanimity, and not slandering.





“Compassion, not coveting (no desire), gentleness, modesty, not fickle (no fluctuations of mind), and vigor.





“Forgiveness, fortitude (courage, endurance, ‘putting up with’), cleanliness (saucham, clean mind and body), no hatred, and no pride.





“All those, Arjuna, are the cardinal virtues and tendencies that reveal the real nature of human beings: their Divinity.





4 “On the other hand are the degenerate qualities, behaviors and moods that render a person less than human:



“Pride (ostentation, hypocrisy), pompousness (arrogance), vanity (self-conceit), anger, harshness (coarseness, sternly judgmental), and absence of discrimination (between right and wrong, Truth and not-Truth, Real and not-Real).





5 “The ‘Divine’ behaviors on the longer list lead to liberation; the degenerate behaviors lead to more time on the wheel of death and rebirth. Do not be concerned, however, Arjuna, as your seeds are good; you have brought Divine qualities into this lifetime.




6 “Look more closely at degenerate behavior — not to dwell on negatives, but to guard against them.




7 “Degenerate beings, because they have no sense of truth or right conduct (dharma), do not know what they should or should not do. There is no purity in them.




8 “If asked why they carry on in such a detestable way they argue that the scriptures are a lie, that God is dead or never existed, that the universe is a dog-eat-dog place with no moral foundation. They contend that what exists in the world is merely the outcome of lust, or is just an accident.




9 “Holding this distorted viewpoint in their minds, they become enemies of the world and serve a negative purpose. Without thinking of the consequences of their actions, they cause destruction and suffering. If left alone to their self-indulgence they would heedlessly destroy the world.



10 “Stuffed with endless, insatiable desires, they are arrogant, vain, and prideful. They live in delusion and chase blindly after evil (those things that lead to suffering).

11 “Beset with dreads, they assume their fearfulness will n cease only upon their death — which is a fallacy, as the same mind will be reborn into a like situation. They are blindly certain that gratifying their own lust is all there is to life.

12 “They are bound on all sides by scheming, greed, and n anger because, being hurtful themselves, they attract hurtful people to themselves. They amass and hoard wealth for the sole purpose of indulging senses and whims. Grabbing for riches governs their every thought and move.

13-15 “They arrogantly proclaim, ‘I wanted this or that and I got it! Tomorrow I will get more. These riches are mine, and I will spend my life making more and more. I have destroyed this and that enemy, and I will get rid of the rest of them. I am indeed mighty. I am ruler of my domain. I love having things of the world. I am successful, powerful, and rich. Who can compare to me? I will buy my way, making lavish contributions to the poor and weak, and revel in my own goodness.’ That is how far blindness and ignorance has eaten into their soul.

16 “These degenerates, bewildered, trapped in their addiction to sense gratification, are stuck in the spider-web of delusion. They spiral downward into the filthy, painful hell of their own foul minds.

17 “Stuffed until choking with pride and conceit, drunk with their own wealth, they pay mere lip service to Divinity. They make offerings to the deities only for name and fame, outward show and self-promotion.

18 “Because they have fully given themselves to the dark forces of egoism, insolence, desire, and wrath, these cruel beings loathe Me, who dwells in their own bodies. They deny My presence in themselves and in others.

19 “Time after time, according to their karma, I cast these malicious evildoers into the wombs of like-minded parents, subjecting them to the wheel of death and birth.

20 “Life after life they take birth in similar degradation without ever reaching Me or even reaching toward Me. Thus they sink to the worst possible depths.

21 “The three main causes of this depravity are the so-called three gates to hell: desire, greed, and anger. Any one of them is enough to bind you to this darkness, so abandon all three.

22 “Those who finally pass by these three dark gates and turn Godward do eventually reach Me, the Supreme Goal. In fact, progress can be rapid once the degenerate person turns his or her aggressive energy toward Me and takes the Divine way.

23 “The function of the scriptures is to guide people toward living a perfected life on earth and repeatedly remind them of the goal, which should be nothing short of achieving Divinity Itself. But those who spurn the teachings and guidance of the scriptures and act only on the impulses of their desires will not achieve perfection and Divinity, only misery.

24 “Let the scriptures tell you what you should and should not do, Arjuna. Know what the right choices are and live up to them. It is simpler than you think. When you, or anyone, is firmly on the road to enlightenment there is no conflict at all between what you do and what the scriptures advise.”





CHAPTER 17




THE PATH OF THREEFOLD FAITH


(Sraddha Traya Vibhaga Yoga)





“Faith comes first . . . faith that contains determination, zeal, and momentum for spiritual growth.”





1 “But Krishna,” Arjuna asks, “some people in all good i faith pursue the right path without having elaborate knowledge of the scriptures. What will be their spiritual attainment? Is the nature of their faith sattva (purity), rajas (activity), or tamas (dark)?”



2-3 Krishna answers: “People are in fact the sum total of the beliefs they hold in their hearts, Arjuna, and there are indeed various kinds of faith. One’s faith corresponds to one’s nature, and one’s nature is equivalent to one’s faith. Every individual is born with one of three kinds of faith: sattvic, rajasic, or tamasic, depending on their temperament.


4 “Those of sattvic temperament revere the gods in heaven. Rajasic people worship power and wealth, even though they may not acknowledge those as their gods. Tamasic people worship the spirits of the dead — ghosts and hurtful deities (those with negative qualities and those who do harm) — which again are in tune with their own disposition.



5-6 “Some people, due to excessive passions and desires, invent harsh ways to inflict pain on themselves. In their foolishness they hurt their bodies and senses and outrage Me, the Atma who lives within them. They may seem to be endowed with ‘faith,’ but such practices are harmful to their spiritual growth.


7 “There are other behaviors that bear on spiritual attainment. One’s eating habits play a part in it, a fact that few recognize. And the way one performs the three main spiritual disciplines — sacrifice (yajna, offering up), purification (tapas, austerities), and charity (dana, alms giving) — also influences one’s spiritual development. Each of these three disciplines can also be understood in light of the three guna types.”





Spiritual Significance of Food





8 “Regarding dietary practices, know that there are subtle elements in food that significantly influence the mind, and therefore shape mental attitudes. This creates a cycle similar to the situation with one’s faith: you are what you eat, and you eat based on what you are. And know, Arjuna, that due to the subtle impact of food on one’s mind, sooner or later all serious spiritual aspirants have to face up to the issue of what they consume.



“Sattvic people, for example, consume pure, mild, nourishing food that strengthens them physically and brings pure thoughts and mental cheerfulness. Their foods are fresh, juicy, soothing, and agreeable to the body’s digestive system. Breakfast is light; the daytime meal is as substantial as required but not more; supper is as light as possible so bodily organs can rest through the night. Only sattva knows the real taste of food.





9 “Rajasic people are drawn to spicy, hot, bitter, salty, acidic, and burning food. Like the people who eat it, this food produces pain, grief, and disease, and hinders spiritual attainment.



10 “Tamasic people eat old, overcooked, stale, tasteless, impure, empty, and dead food with no nutritional value. This food returns these qualities in kind to the eater.”





Types and Efficacy of Spiritual Sacrifice




11 “Contemplate the three spiritual practices (sacrifice, austerity, and charity) with regard to the guna qualities.

“First, consider sacrifice (yajna), the ‘loving offering’ and ‘fundamental law of nature’ I mentioned earlier.* Sacrifice is sattvic when it is offered up for its own sake with no desire in it, no expectation of reward or attachment to the fruits of the offering.





12 “Sacrifice is rajasic when performed for self-glorification, for the sake of show and the benefits it will bring, or as an attempt to barter a favor from God. Selfish sacrifice is detrimental to spiritual growth.

13 “Tamasic persons offer up empty sacrifice devoid of solemnity, without any solemn earnestness, lacking even the proper mantras (chants) or rituals — with no faith whatsoever.”





Types and Efficacy of Spiritual Purification




14 “Consider purification, tapas, which literally means ‘to melt,’ as in refining ore. The purpose of purification is not pain and penance, but to deliberately refine one’s life, to melt it down and recast it into a higher order of purity and spirituality. The goal is very important; it is not self-punishment but refinement — to shift from human existence into Divinity!

“There are three main methods of purification: the refinement of one’s thoughts, words, and deeds — also called the purification, respectively, of one’s instruments of mind, speech, and body. When you modify these three you automatically change for the better.





“Purifying one’s deeds (‘bodily austerities’) consists of four key practices: veneration of the Gods (which are all facets of the one Divinity); veneration of holy ones, persons who have so dedicated their careers; veneration of gurus (spiritual teachers, older people who set good examples); and veneration of the sages, those who already know Atma and have transcended body-mind.





15 “Purifying one’s words (‘speech austerities’) also includes four key practices: truth telling; not hurting; not flattering; and devotional chanting (reading aloud). “I will briefly elaborate each:

“Always tell the truth, Arjuna, and present it in as pleasant a way as possible. If you cannot do that, remain silent. If something absolutely needs to be said you must uphold the truth, but find a way to do it that is gentle and obliging.





“Do not hurt others through harsh words. Words can be more painful than physical violence, and the hurt lasts longer. Words meant to excite negativity are an act of violence; shun such words. Abstinence from harmful speech is very important.





“Scrupulously avoid flattery, even if what you say is pleasant and contains truth. Promoting vanity does not help spiritual growth. The point is to express (even under your breath) only beneficial words that promote movement toward Divinity.





“Finally, devotional chanting, the regular reading aloud of sacred texts, is a purification of speech that can contribute much to spiritual progress.





16 “Consider now, lastly, the purification of thought (‘mind austerity’). This is more important than the other two refinements (words and deeds), because good words and deeds are spontaneous in the mind that is saturated with good thoughts. Maintain a calm and gentle state of mind and you will not be speaking wayward words or doing unwanted deeds. To develop equanimity of mind, allow only good thoughts and noble sentiments to arise in you. This may sound impossible to most people, but as we know now, one can indeed cleanse the mind through constant, intense, direct practice.

17 “When you relentlessly practice these acts of purification of thought, word, and deed with firm faith and no expectation of reward, your practices are sattvic.

18 “When you practice these acts of purification to gain admiration or respect, your practices are rajasic. Any selfish motive to receive a return, whether in this world or the next, makes the act rajasic, and this extinguishes its value for spiritual attainment.

19 “When you perform these three purification practices without understanding the reasons for doing them, or if they are body centered, or include sorcery or harm to yourself or others — then your too-austere efforts are tamasic.”





Types and Efficacy of Charity




20 “Now, Arjuna, consider the three types of charity (dana, alms giving). As I already stressed, it is one’s duty to give. When you offer charity out of a positive sense of duty with no feeling of obligation in it and no expectation of reward, and furnish it at the right time and place to a deserving person who can make no return, that giving is sattvic.

21 “Handing over a gift with strings attached to it makes both giver and receiver uncomfortable. Charity presented with the hint of desire for receiving a return (either here or hereafter) is rajasic.

22 “And finally, gifts given at the wrong time and place to unworthy persons (people of questionable character who squander their money or do not help others), or gifts presented disrespectfully or accompanied by an insult — those charities are tamasic.”





Om Tat Sat*




23 “Although these three spiritual activities — sacrifice, purification, and charity (yajna, tapas, and dana) — are the most elevating actions going on in the world, they all have a tinge of worldly impurity in them, even the best sattvic practices of them. To cleanse these practices, invoke the declaration ‘Om Tat Sat’ as you undertake them. This ancient, three-word phrase echoes far back to the very beginning of time to when Divinity first projected Itself as sound. Each word — Om, Tat, and Sat — represents the Supreme Consciousness from which everything else comes.

24 “Consider them one by one. The syllable Om (essentially an appellation of the Godhead) is what spiritually knowledgeable people utter whenever they perform spiritual activities. This lends a sacred and blessed tone to their acts and begins to dissolve the tinge of impurity in them.

25 “Saying Tat while performing these activities (literally, ‘It,’ God) reminds one that all actions are God’s and not one’s own. This removes the sense of ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ the ego, from the doing.

26 “Voicing Sat (literally, ‘That which is,’ Existence Itself) invokes an overall attitude of goodness and serves as a reminder that the action about to be done is a noble deed conducive to God realization. Uttering Sat purifies your own activities and reforms the world as well.

27 “Sat has other shades of meaning and other purposes. Any action performed for the sake of the Divine is Sat. To engage steadfastly in the spiritual activities (sacrifice, purification, and charity) is also Sat.

“Repeating Om Tat Sat creates an uplifted attitude toward any activity. The implication is that Sat (‘That which is’) is both the means and the goal, both the Godhead and the way to reach It.





28 “Finally, Arjuna, know that faith comes first. These spiritual activities must be done with sraddha, faith that contains determination, zeal, and momentum for spiritual growth. To do these without this firm faith is considered Asat (‘not That’), which means the act is of no account spiritually and nothing worthwhile will come of it here or in the hereafter.”

* Sacrifice as a “sacred life,” an offering of devotion, etc. See chapter 3, 10–16; chapter 4, 23”33;.



* Literally “Om That Is.” In essence Om Tat Sat means “God alone is the Reality.”





CHAPTER 18




LIBERATION THROUGH KNOWING, ACTING, AND LOVING


(Moksha Sanyasa Yoga)





“Give Me your whole heart.”





1 Arjuna asks, “Krishna, Divine One, what is the difference between sanyasa and tyaga? Since both words mean renunciation, how does the one differ from the other?”




2 Krishna answers, “The sages say that giving up selfish actions (sanyasa) is one kind of renunciation, and abandoning and relinquishing the fruits of actions (tyaga) is another kind of renunciation.




3 “Some sages assert that one should give up all actions because, being worldly actions, they all have a tinge of the impure, the not-Real in them. Others declare that one should continue certain actions, namely the three highest kinds: sacrifice, purification, and charity.




4 “Listen, Arjuna, while I give you the truth. Both terms, sanyasa and tyaga mean renunciation. Renunciation is not a negative process, but rather the positive act of giving up. We are surrounded by examples of this in nature: the sun constantly giving up its heat and light to foster life; a ripened fruit abandoning its parent tree; the mother giving birth to the baby she has carried for so long; students leaving school upon graduation; and grandest of all, the individual soul abandoning worldly entanglements to join Me, the Divine.




5 “The ‘renunciations’ we have already considered, sacrifice, purification, and charity, are the three highest of human activities. You should never give them up. They all are methods of removing impurities for those who understand them — and purity is absolutely necessary to move Godward, which, as I have made clear so often, is the goal.




6 “Also, as I explained, you have to selflessly perform these three high activities with no attachment or desire. It is essential to know this. The cow is sacred because of her selfless gift of her milk, which becomes the strength of life in other beings. Yogis and sages contribute to the purity of the world by giving, not by amassing. This, as I said, is the essential law that governs life at the spiritual level.




7 “Indeed, the scriptures proclaim that the sacred acts of sacrifice, purification, and charity are obligatory and should be performed as long as the body lasts. Those who, through ignorance, do not perform them are tamasic.




8 “To avoid these sacred duties out of fear or aversion to physical discomfort is rajasic. No spiritual benefit will accrue to that person.




9 “But when one engages in these activities for duty’s 9 sake alone, without attachment, with no desire for any reward, then the action is sattvic. Calmness and purity are born of this attitude.



10 “Sattvic people, not plagued by doubt and aware of the True Self (Atma), are steady in their obligations. They neither shy from the disagreeable nor yearn for the pleasant. They just do.

11 “It is impossible, as I said, for a human being to fully n be a renunciate (to give up all action) while still in the body. It simply cannot be done. But the person who detaches from the fruits of actions can be regarded as a genuine renunciate. True renunciation is relinquishing all desire for personal reward.

12 “Those still attached, who do things for selfish purposes, will reap their rewards in due season — either here or hereafter. Their accrued karma can be either bad, good, or mixed, depending on their actions.

“Being hurled into darkness to be reborn as a beast is an example of a reward for evil actions. Being born as a celestial being in heaven is an example of a reward for good actions. Taking birth as a human is an example of a mixed reward. But remember, Arjuna, those who renounce desire and attachment reap no consequences whatsoever of their actions, either in this world or the next.”





The Components and Interactions of Action




13-15 “Listen while I explain the five factors that spiritual philosophy says contribute to every action: first, the body (there could be no action without it); second, the doer of the action; third, the various senses; fourth, the effort (the motion or energy involved in the doing); and fifth, the presiding deity manipulating all these instruments, including the unseen destiny latent in all actions (prarabdha). These five factors are involved in all human activity, whether an action of mind, speech, or body (thought, word, or deed), and whether the action is right or wrong (dharmic or adharmic).

16 “A common misapprehension is that the Self (Atma) is the doer of actions. But Atma has nothing to do with any of the five factors of action. The Atma performs no acts, no work at all, is eternal and pure, wholly unattached to the realm of matter (where all action takes place). The sense of doership belongs to ego, the mistaken sense rooted in the mind that you are an entity separate from Atma.

17 “Spiritually evolved persons, established in the Atma, whose minds are free from the notion of doership, understand the True SelfWithin and are therefore not tainted by their actions. To them, worldly activities (such as, in your case, killing or being killed) are modifications taking place in the realm of nature (prakriti). Nature, remember, is really the doer of all karmas. As they are firmly aware of this, yogis rise above the turmoil and bondage of karma.

18-19 “Now, Arjuna, I will explain how the forces of nature (gunas) interact with action. There are three general elements of action: knowledge, action, and the doer. Examining these three elements from the perspective of each of the three gunas, you see that there are three types of knowledge, three types of action, and three types of doers.

20 “The person of sattvic knowledge knows the Divinity of the Self, sees Divinity in all beings, knows the oneness of all creatures in the universe, and sees none of the separateness that others see.

21 “The person of rajasic knowledge perceives separateness everywhere and sees each individual as distinct from all others. He or she believes there are as many separate souls as there are bodies.

22 “The person of tamasic knowledge has, in reality, no knowledge at all, only ignorance. This deluded one clings to the belief that an individual is only a body. To him or her the loss of the body means the loss of everything. There is no subtlety of reason in this.

23 “Now consider the three kinds of action. Sattvic actions are those acts set forth in the scriptures and performed without attachment. The person who performs a sattvic action does it as a sacred duty for duty’s sake alone, not for pleasure or personal reward. There is no drudgery in sattvic work.

24 “Work (action) is rajasic when goaded by desire for the fruits of that action. Rajasic work entangles one in self-indulgent pursuits, and requires an inordinate amount of egoistic effort. This type of action hinders spiritual growth and yields sorrow.

25 “Actions are tamasic when undertaken blindly without thinking or considering consequences. No thought is given to the cost or merit of doing the action, and the doer has no notion of his or her own capacity to accomplish it.

26 “Consider now the three types of doers. Sattvic doers see it all as the work of the Divine, and see themselves as but instruments of Divinity. Thus completely egoless, these doers are free of desire and attachment. They are ardent about the work to be done, and yet unaffected by success or failure.

27 “Rajasic doers are driven by desires for personal gain; they are greedy and destructive to the point of cruelty, and joyous or despondent depending on the success or failure of their acts. They are overzealous and even harmful to others who seem to get in the way. Spiritual achievement is not for these doers.

28 “Tamasic doers are inattentive, unconcerned, lethargic, and lazy. Indolence and procrastination are their main features, along with deceitfulness, maliciousness, and dishonesty.

29 “Also consider, from the perspectives of the gunas, two additional qualities: intellect and firmness of mind. Intellect refers to the faculty of discrimination (buddhi); firmness of mind (dhrti) refers to the strength of convictions, resolve, fortitude, and courage on the spiritual path. Listen now as I first describe the levels of intellect and then the levels of firmness.

30 “The sattvic intellect (buddhi) discriminates between Truth and non-Truth, Real and not Real. It knows the difference between action and inaction (karma and akarma), and knows what helps or hinders spiritual progress. It differentiates between fear and fearlessness, and understands what sets the soul free and what imprisons it. The sattvic intellect leads one Godward.

31 “The rajasic intellect also discriminates, but wrongly. It has a distorted understanding of right and wrong deeds, rationalizing that the means justify the ends no matter how selfish or hurtful. This type of buddhi is capable of converting truth into falsehood and vice versa. Greed, passion, anger, and fear cloud its vision. It stays mired in base worldly life instead of guiding one upward.

32 “The tamasic intellect, wrapped in ignorance and enveloped in darkness, simply cannot discriminate. Goodness appears bad to this intellect while evil seems good. It understands life in a perverted way. The tamas-dominated intellect drags one ever downward.

33 “Now consider the three degrees of firmness of mind (dhrti). Sattvic firmness is an absolutely unwavering devotion to the Divine, a deeply profound resolve to move toward and merge in God. You carefully cultivate this fixity of purpose through inner discipline and meditation. You turn all life energy (prana) and all functions of mind (feelings, thoughts, and senses) Godward, and then firmly fasten them. Like the compass needle that points north regardless of the direction of travel, this focus on the Divine never veers from the ultimate goal of merging in That.

34 “Rajasic firmness of mind is similarly resolute but holds fast to the desires for pomp, power, property, and prestige (or even to the attachment to virtuous living). If turned Godward this resolve could lift you toward the Supreme, but directed toward worldly enjoyment it condemns you to repeated lifetimes of turmoil and pain.

35 “Tamasic firmness of mind is born of ignorance, lack of purpose, and lack of fortitude, which results in a deadening inertia. In the absence of discrimination or understanding, the only resolve in tamas is to eat, drink, and sleep away one’s time. The tamasic person ignores the rest of life as if it were a dream.”





The Cessation of Sorrow




36 “We can also understand happiness (sukha, joy) in terms of the three gunas. The search for happiness gives impetus to life. All beings join this endless hunt but very few find it. The happiness I speak of here comes only after long practice. Sporadic, halfhearted attempts to achieve it do not succeed. Those who achieve everlasting happiness end all sorrow in life! Listen, Arjuna, to the three classifications of happiness.

37 “Sattvic happiness is the serenity of mind that meditation brings, the sweet joy that comes with Self-realization. Like all things good, it is hard work in the beginning but sheer joy later — bitter poison at first, sweet nectar in the end. The fountain of lasting bliss flows from Atma, the True Self Within. You can find this bliss inside through abhyasa, steady practice.

38 “Rajasic happiness is just the opposite: nectar at first, poison in the end. It is temporary pleasure obtained from the contact of your senses with objects in the world. Give in to this type of happiness and you invite the pain that always accompanies it. Rely compulsively on your senses for enjoyment and you rob your strength, stamina, and capacity for growth. Your spiritual wisdom fades. Pleasure and its corollary, pain, are what one drinks in the world; real bliss is what one sips within.

39 “Tamasic happiness, born of dark delusion, is a non-comprehending, sleeplike existence, bitter at both beginning and end. The only pleasure in this type of ‘happiness’ is the meager satisfaction of sleep or the perverse enjoyment that comes with idle pursuits and neglect of duty.

40 “In short, Arjuna, the gunas, the forces of nature, characterize all of creation. No creature in this world, or the middle regions, or even among the gods in heaven is free from the gunas. The gunas and prakriti (nature) are identical. Even Brahma the Creator, the loftiest of the working gods,* is not truly liberated. Why? Because his action of creating takes place through the guna material of nature, which connects him to nature. Consequently even Brahma must someday cease to exist. So, from Brahma on down to a blade of grass, all living things are connected with prakriti.”





Prescribed Duties in Society




41 “I have mentioned the importance of doing one’s duty, old friend; now I will explain the nature of prescribed duties. The responsibilities of people in the various segments of society can be divided under four general headings: Seers, Leaders, Providers, and Servers. No particular group of people is superior to any other, but like limbs of the body, each has a respective role to play. These groupings are consistent with the conditioning of the gunas, whether that conditioning is from earlier lifetimes or this life. It is said that people are born of their own nature.

42 “Consider them one by one. Society’s Seers are the holy ones (in some societies referred to as Brahmins). Seers are expected to establish the character and spiritual underpinnings of society. Their duties are generally of pure, unmixed sattva and are therefore congenial to a person of sattvic nature. This is what is meant by the term ‘born of their own nature.’ Providing spiritual and moral leadership is generally ‘natural’ to Seers.

“Seers must have spiritual knowledge and wisdom — knowledge of God-realization obtained through devout study — and wisdom beyond knowledge, acquired through direct experience of the Atma. Seers must have purity of heart, mind, and body; and allow no perversity or corruption to creep in. They must possess serenity, calmness, forbearance, forgiveness, and patience — and hold to an unwavering faith in the Divinity of all life. The primary purpose of the Seers is to help transform society’s exemplary human beings into godly beings.





43 “The primary objective of society’s Leaders is to help transform ordinary human beings into exemplary human beings. The Leaders (referred to as Kshatriyas) are expected to guard the welfare and prosperity of society by serving the people. They are charged with bringing moral stamina and adherence to duty through courage, fearlessness, resourcefulness, and ingenuity in the face of changing conditions. They must be examples of law, justice, and generosity. They must lead by inspiring the populace through good example and yet be ready to enforce their authority.

“Both groups are strong in their own ways. The strength of the Leaders lies in their courage; the strength of the Seers lies in their spiritual glow.





44 “Society’s Providers and Servers are, respectively, the business people (referred to as Vaishyas) and the workers (referred to as Sudras). The combined responsibilities and expectations of these two groupings is to prepare, supply, and equip society with the goods and services it needs. Providers are charged with the activities of economics and commerce such as growing food, rearing cows for milk and dairy products, the honest manufacture and exchange of merchandise, and trading. Servers (workers) are the foundation. They provide the strength and sinew of society by working with, for, and in the service of all segments of society.

“Although there are different expectations of the four groups, Arjuna, remember that the practices conducive to spiritual growth — worship, controlling the senses, and so forth — are within the competencies of all people in all divisions of society.”





Achieving the Godhead




45 “All humanity is born for ultimately achieving perfection. This is the very purpose of humanity. Through being devoted to one’s duties each person will find this perfection. But take heed, Arjuna, the person who abhors his or her duty can never become fulfilled.

46 “Through performing work selflessly with no attachment to the outcome and doing it as an act of devotion to the Divine, you attain fulfillment and spiritual perfection. The notion that work and worship are separate activities is common but incorrect. Live your life and do your work in an attitude of adoration of the Divine. Do each and every act for the sake of the Divine. Love God in everything you do. Convert your earthly existence into worship. The one who does this is truly a yogi.

47 “Your very nature dictates that you perform the duties attuned to your disposition. Those duties are your dharma, your natural calling. It is far better to do your own dharma, even if you do it imperfectly, than to try to master the work of another. Those who perform the duties called for by their obligations, even if those duties seem of little merit, are able to do them with less effort — and this releases consciousness that can be directed Godward.

48 “Just as fire produces smoke, people’s actions produce effects that can be negative as well as positive. No activities, regardless of how good, are completely free of blemish. One should not abandon one’s duties even though they may seem tainted. True yogis discharge their duties faithfully as acts of devotion to the Divine, and thus free themselves from any contamination.

49 “The person whose mind and intellect are no longer attached to anything whatsoever, who has subdued and gone beyond the sense of self (ego) and the desire for enjoyment — that person has, through renunciation, attained the supreme state of liberation from the bondage of karma. This loving yogi has become an instrument of Divinity.”





How One Becomes Perfect




50 “So learn from Me now, friend, as I briefly profile the qualities that make the loving yogi one with Me, Brahman, the Godhead. There is no higher achievement in life.

51 “Cultivate a pure intellect. Free your mind and heart of delusion. Be self-restrained. Give up the ego. Subdue your senses through steady will. Abandon the sights, tastes, and noises of the world. Put aside with no regret the likes and dislikes so burdensome in life.

52 “Seek solitude, eat but little, lead a simple, self-reliant life, curbing your thoughts, speech, and actions. Be detached, impersonal. Engage your mind always in concentration, contemplation, and meditation on the Godhead.

53 “Cast from yourself all egotism, violence, arrogance, desire, anger, and attachment. Turn your back on luxuries and property. Possess very little, and shed any sense of mine.’ Be calm, at peace with yourself and all others. Enter into the supreme state of unity with Me — I who am Truth, Consciousness, and Bliss.

54 “Thus united with Me, tranquil of mind and heart, neither craving nor grieving anything or anyone, accept all people equally and serve Me, Divinity, in every living creature. Love Me most dearly.

55 “Be very clear about the crucial importance of love. To love is to know Me. The act itself of loving is indeed the experience of really knowing Me, for I am Love, Arjuna! To love is to know My innermost nature, the Truth that I am. It is through this sacred and deep knowing that you gain access to Me and become one with My own Self. Loving is knowing God! As a deep knower of the Godhead you actually become the Godhead.

56 “Do not renounce action itself but only the sense of doership. Thus, even while engaging in worldly actions be but an instrument of the Divine. When you surrender there is no weariness in your work. As you are fully concentrated on Me, you will come home to Me in eternity.

57 “Mentally cast every thought and act onto Me. Know I am your best friend and only refuge. Be solely devoted to Me. Fix your mind and intellect on Me. Once you recognize that your mind, senses, and body — and all activities performed by them — are Divinity, then your sense of doership, of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ leaves you. When that happens, you have no concern but to do Divinity’s work for Its sake only. Your only interest should be to merge in God. It is by loving God that you rise from the human to the Divine.

58-59 “The one with his or her mind thus fixed on Me can, through My grace, overcome all obstacles. I know, Arjuna, that you are a good devotee and a beloved friend, but if you stay caught in your egoism and do not heed My words, you are lost and you will perish. If, in your vanity you think, ‘I will not fight,’ that misguided resolve will be in vain, because your very nature will drive you to do it.

“You can do no greater harm than fail to follow your inner truth! You have been nurtured in the duties of a warrior-leader. Your aptitudes, temperament, and disposition are such that you must oppose wrongdoing in the world. Facing this righteous fight you cannot simply decide on impulse to practice renunciation and quietism. This ego-driven decision of yours creates a conflict in your personality. Your inner nature will prevail in spite of your ego. Do not yield to this egoism and disgrace yourself.





60 “A man is not different from his nature, Arjuna, and is obliged to act in conformity with it. You yourself have created the tendencies that bind you now. The law of karma is more powerful than your ego. Even if in your delusion you think that you do not want to fight, your own nature will force you to. Following one’s nature is the only way to work out one’s karma.

61 “God dwells in the very heart of every creature and whirls them around and around as though mounted on a revolving machine. It is as if dancing puppets imagine that they are the dancers rather than merely puppets, and because of this illusion they become increasingly entangled in the strings.

“The yogi, however, changes this basic attitude and holds the conviction that all actions are in the Divine One’s hands. In this way the yogi lives life as the willing instrument of Divinity.





62 “Seek refuge only in the Divine, beloved friend. Always remember the illustrious truth that you have neither existence nor individuality independent of God. Attune your whole life to this truth. Take refuge in Me and experience great peace of mind. Those who do not come fully to Me continue to bring agitation and a stressful life upon themselves.”





The Highest of Truths




63 “I have now taught you the secret of secrets. I have revealed the most mysterious of all mysteries. This sacred knowledge is now yours. Its sole purpose is to lead humanity from the darkness of ignorance to enlightenment, from the perishable world of nature to the imperishable world of Spirit, from the non-Real to the Real, from utter sorrow to eternal bliss, and from death to immortality in Me, Brahman. Reflect upon this daringly and fully, Arjuna. Inquire deeply into these teachings and then act as you choose.”

64 Krishna pauses, “Now listen once again to the most profound secret, the highest of all truths. I tell you this for your everlasting benefit because you are so very dear to Me.

65 “Fix your mind on Me. Give Me your whole heart. Revere Me always and bow before Me only. Make Me your very own. By these acts you shall discover Me and come to Me. I promise you this because we are forever linked through love, this greatest of unifying forces. This Divine love is both the means for reaching Me and the ultimate goal of all human existence; indeed, it is the pinnacle of human spiritual achievement.

66 “Achieving this is the culmination of all one’s strivings. Past good actions, which have been helpful in your Godward progress, have now fully served their purpose. Therefore, renounce all dharmas and take refuge in Me alone.

“Giving up dharmas does not mean you suddenly become nonvirtuous; it indicates you have simply moved beyond it all. Taking refuge in Me means that you give up the idea that you are the doer; then it is as though all your acts are performed by Divinity Itself for Its sake alone, with no concern about whether the acts are dharmic or adharmic. When you are acting as God for God it is impossible to do something adharmic.





“Through this intense devotion and self-surrender your mistakes and sins (actions that steer you away from Divinity) will be absolved and you will merge with Me, the Supreme, forever liberated from the cares and grief of worldly existence.





67 “Our impromptu seminar on the principles governing humanity’s spiritual development is now finished, O warrior. You must not tell this sacred truth to anyone who is not devoted, nor to anyone who speaks ill of Me, nor to anyone who does not care to listen. No one should try to impose this holy information on another.

68-69 “But those who love Me and teach these profound 68-69 secrets to people who are ready to listen will definitely come to Me. No one renders a higher service to Me than this, and no one on Earth is dearer to Me.

70-71 “Those who, although not given to teaching others, study this sacred dialogue, are also directly revering Me. And even those who simply listen to these words with faith and acceptance are liberated from the misfortunes of life and attain the happier worlds.

72 “You have been attentive, Arjuna, but have you listened carefully and grasped this teaching? What now of your delusions and ignorance?”

73 Arjuna responds, “O Krishna, my delusion has gone. 73 Where my life seemed unbearable before, those self-created problems have dissolved. By Your grace I am shorn of all doubts. My power and joy have returned to me. My faith is firm. I am aware of my true Reality and committed to my dharma. I will do as You command.”





74 Sanjaya leaned away from the blind old king and said, “Thus ends the wondrous dialogue between the all-pervading Spirit, Lord Krishna, and His high-souled human friend, Arjuna. This dialogue has been so thrilling my hair stands on end.

75 “Through mystical benevolence I have been able to report these profound secrets of spiritual unity directly from the lips of God — spoken directly to His loving comrade, man.

76 “I take these not only as teachings meant for Arjuna but as lessons for myself, O King. Whenever I recall this holy dialogue, I will rejoice again and again.

77 “I feel especially blessed to have seen the astonishing vision of the Divine’s cosmic form. As other people use memories from their past to help recover a sublime state of mind, I will have this Divine vision of God’s true form to help me bring back the glory of this experience over and over again.

78 “Wherever Divinity and humanity are found together — with humanity armed and ready to fight wickedness — there also will be found victory in the battle of life, a life expanded to Divinity and crowned with prosperity and success, a life of adherence to dharma, in tune with the Cosmic Plan. I am convinced of this.”

* Again, not to be confused with Brahman, the Absolute Godhead





EPILOGUE




IT IS NEVER THAT EASY





Arjuna looks directly into the eyes of his best friend, God Himself, and, in one of the most famous lines in the Gita, pledges to do as God commanded. Can we therefore rest easy assuming that the great warrior-prince lived heroically ever after? Unfortunately no. As we know, the real battle is always inner — and real life is never that easy.

Recall that The Bhagavad Gita is a dialogue in the middle of a much longer story. We therefore have information about what happened following this wondrous conversation with Divinity.



Arjuna picked up his mace and bow and arrows and plunged into the heart of the struggle of life. Fierce, unafraid, he showered arrows upon the enemy, sending thousands into the jaws of death — at times fighting so furiously that both armies stopped to watch in awe.





Arjuna gained fame as the war’s outstanding hero. Hour after blood-stained hour, the battle raged for eighteen days ebbing and flowing, its outcome truly in doubt until the last moments when only a handful of soldiers remained standing on either side.





But an odd thing happened. At the most critical times in the fighting, at those turns when Arjuna came face to face with venerated relatives and teachers who were now his enemies, he faltered! Despite his direct relationship with God and regardless of his sacred vow, the great warrior softened; his arrows could not fly true. His fierce resolve dissolved; the sacred covenant he forged with his beloved Divinity vaporized into the acrid smoke of war.





Krishna, ever the greatest teacher, feigned outrage at these crucial moments — on one occasion leaping from the chariot in a show of utter disgust. These displays shocked Arjuna back to his duties. Had God Himself not intervened in this way, the battle, and dharma, would have been lost.





AFTERWORD




RETURNING AGAIN AND AGAIN


“Philosophy that cannot be understood, scriptures that are not practical — the present world has plenty of these; it is a waste to talk of them.”


— Sathya Sai Baba





“Have a scripure to recite, but make your own path.”


— K. M. Munshi




In this complicated, shifting world it is one thing to intend to do something and quite another to live up to it. As waves of change roll through, the setting alters and your mood turns, deflecting you to another place. What seemed crystalline in one situation becomes foggy in another. Then you forget, you lose your bearings and your strength seeps away. That is what happened to Arjuna. It happens to all of us.

But when we read the Gita again and again, as all scriptures should be read, the words grow in us. We’re first interested in the teachings, and then we become preoccupied and engrossed in the high ideals and ideas it conveys. After a while the process of reading it becomes, as promised, an actual experience of the profound truths it brings. Each time we reopen this ancient guidebook this process repeats. Like a beautiful song, the Gita seems to thicken and grow richer and lovelier the more we return to it. Its messages gradually, surely seep into our innermost being, eventually penetrating and prompting every thought and act. It’s as if we become a part of the Gita, and it becomes a part of us.

Thus fully absorbed, we are opened up to the spiritual energy in this wondrous old scripture. We begin unconsciously, almost naturally, to put the teachings into practice. We actually are, for those moments at least, what the Gita prompts us to be: quieter, more aware of our highest Self, more active in the world, and yet more selfless, more accepting, more successful, and ultimately even more godly.





“Substitute thoughts of Divinity for worldly worries.”




An experience during our recent trip to India illustrates how being immersed in the Gita (or any other high and holy message) can surely impact one’s life.

After twenty-three hours in the air and twelve airport hours on the ground, having crossed thirteen time zones and the international dateline (where, in an eye blink, twenty-four more hours were seemingly added to the distance already traveled), we finally arrived at the little airport at Puttaparthi. We were tired and a bit disoriented but very happy to be “home.” Louise was like a little girl returning from summer camp. It was late August. Our plan, as usual, was to stay here for six months with Swami (Sathya Sai Baba).

We settled into ashram life and I became completely involved in writing this book. Louise, normally a rather non-domestic person, gladly slipped into her writer’s wife role, which in her words is to “hold the space and fill it with love.” This meant she moved quietly around our small flat, doing chores, feeding me, making sure the “space” stayed conducive to my writing.

She eagerly joined me each evening to go over my day’s notes. We were thus fully and completely absorbed in the Gita — every minute, hour, and day — day after day, eating, sleeping, dreaming, and breathing the Gita — reaching deeply into those old teachings to hone them for Westerners. The days rolled by quietly and predictably.

But this quiet orderliness was abruptly swooshed aside in late September when something happened to Louise. We were having our lunch. Suddenly her words slurred, her eyes unfocused, and her head rolled to one side. The food fell from her mouth, her tongue lolled, each breath became a sort of rattle. I held her, straining to infuse my strength into her small body, wondering what was happening and what to do. Should I call for help? How? There’s no 911 here! Who could I call? We live in a fourth floor walk-up; how could I get her down the stairs?

After a few minutes she seemed to be surfacing from the wave of darkness that had swept her away. Maybe, I thought hopefully, this attack was just a passing incident. But as she came to and we began to talk, the wave surged again, submerging her. “Dearest, dearest, beloved Louise,” I whispered as I cradled her, “what’s happening to you?”

Our neighbor, a cardiologist at the new hospital down the road, immediately put her into intensive care and began the I-Vs and life-support monitors and other processes used for stroke victims. The blankness in her brain continued to ebb and flow for a while and then seemed to move out. She was conscious now but still couldn’t think or walk straight, and her left foot wouldn’t work, nor her right hand.

I was sitting on a folding metal chair drawn up close to her bed. The modern hospital ward’s exceptionally high ceilings seemed to allow extra space for healing. Her eyes were closed. The nurses quietly moving about in their traditional nurse’s caps added to the feeling of composure in the large, semi-darkened room.

In my own quiet, I heard Krishna’s words from chapter 12, “Accept the knocks of life as blessings in disguise. … Be unaffected by the bad or good things that happen to you.”

One of Louise’s lucid moments arose and she opened her eyes. “Hi,” she managed weakly. I took her hand. “We have to accept this is a gift, Weez,” I said, not really understanding what that meant. “We have to see this as one of those blessings in disguise.” “Yes,” she said. We were quiet for several minutes and then she slipped beneath another wave.

A “gift?” What does that mean? The word “acceptance” came to me, clearer now. I rolled it over and over in my mind, “acceptance … acceptance … acceptance.” It took on more and more strength each time.

Then I became aware that I was feeling better, stronger now, readier to handle this crisis. I was also a bit surprised to find my anxiety had left me. In its place was a quiet, almost subdued feeling. I felt a sort of still happiness in me. Happiness? At a time like this? There was no elation in it, but it registered internally as happiness. Maybe this is what bliss is, I thought.





The Prasad Zone




Suddenly I knew that everything that was happening to her (us) at that point — or ever — was part of the Universe’s plan. I knew that no matter how things may appear to turn out, everything would be okay. This wasn’t mere wishful thinking. I knew it, and was sure I knew it. It was palpable. I knew it deep in my physical being. And I was absolutely certain of it in both my mind and heart.

I referred to this mood of certainty later as a “ Prasad Zone.” Prasad is Sanskrit for “gift” or “grace.” I found out later that prasad also means “Divine favor” and “to become clear and calm.” It all fit with what I was experiencing.

Indeed, I had become the serenity that comes with Divinity. All uneasiness had been swept from me. Does that mean I was Divinity at those times? Perhaps. Krishna would say so.

Not once did negative thoughts enter my consciousness. I was distantly aware of the usual what-ifs (What if she doesn’t make it? What if she can’t live a normal life? What if I can’t handle this?), but those self-doubts didn’t take shape. Like wolves lurking in the dark beyond my circle of light, they were out there waiting to attack — but as I didn’t dwell on these negative thoughts, they never gained sufficient strength to close in on me.

Now, back in this “real world” assailed by the news-at-eleven culture of fear here in the West, it’s hard to imagine a mental state so free of negatives. But back there in that zone, I lived it. Clearly my task at that point was but to accept and even welcome what had come, and to perform my duty in good spirits, and to not worry about the outcomes.

This aura of harmonious acceptance had completely enveloped me. Nothing worldly bothered me — the tropical heat, electrical outages in the dark early morning when I was hurrying to shave and get to the hospital, missed taxis, skipped meals— none of those everyday annoyances impinged on that calm state.

An even greater gift: Louise was in the exact same place! Her version of the Zone was to be absolutely sure that all was well and not to worry one iota about herself or her body. Although tethered to the machinery of modern medicine — tubes, monitors, injections, CT scans, and such — she spent no energy or attention on her physical health. She watched with detached interest and participated as necessary, but was totally unfazed. No fretting, no fears; she was in constantly good spirits, possessing the openness and easiness of mind necessary for the healing energy in her body to carry out its work.

It was as though the Gita’s teachings had come alive, as though Krishna Himself had come up out of the book to take care of us — reminding us in chapter 2 to “be unperturbed by sorrow and adversity.” Or it was as if our own swami, Sathya Sai Baba (whom millions believe to be the avatar of this age, the modern incarnation of Krishna) had reached out to touch our hearts and remove our pain and worry. Or perhaps we had actually been transported, as the Gita teaches, into Serenity itself, which we now know is no less than Brahman, the Godhead.

Looking back, we see now that it was our total absorption in the Gita’s teachings that really counted, not just the Gita itself. The Gita was the vehicle, the guide, but it is our fusion with it that brought the spiritual power. Our extraordinary strength flowed from actually living the messages and literally being these wondrous teachings for a while.

We remained in that curious zone for several months as Louise pulled through her crisis and began to recover. I learned to be a passable care provider and chief cook and bottle washer. My pièce de résistance: great toast and tea.

During that time we lived so close to Divinity that we all but became It. Some people misread my serenity and assumed I was in shock or in denial, or they would comment that I was “taking it well.” Everybody was surprised that Louise seemed so well. (The old joke comes to mind: “You look terrific, you must have been sick.”) We knew, privately, that it was due to our being so immersed in the Gita, but we seldom said anything. It’s hard to explain acceptance this high.

Even now, a year later, with Louise almost fully recovered (“miraculously” people tell us), the Zone is still with us. It’s not as intense, but surely present. Maybe the Gita’s teachings, once imbibed, do indeed last forever.

Krishna’s final message comes to mind: “Now listen . . . to the most profound secret,” He said, “listen to the highest of all truths. . . . Fix your mind on Me [Divinity]. Give Me your whole heart. Revere Me always … [Make Me your very own, and you shall] merge with Me. … ”

At the end of this sacred text the ever-honest Sanjaya finishes his narration of this God-to-human dialogue and is clear that he will continue his own immersion in it. He reminds himself (and us) to return often to this Divine Song, this Bhagavad Gita, and rejoice again and again.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS





The Bhagavad Gita is universal knowledge passed down through the ages by countless hands and minds. This particular version of it is my work and my responsibility. In the course of this writing I drew from over thirty insightful explanations of the Gita (see the Bibliography). Certain of them were especially helpful.

The Penguin Classics Bhagavad Gita by Juan Mascaro was my introduction to the Gita in 1975. A few years later I also came to read Geetha Vahini: The Divine Gospel (spelling variations are common in India) by Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba, which to my hungry soul was like eating food, and remains my principal inspiration.

Then, a few years later, the Ramakrishna organization’s fine 1,008-page commentary by Swami Chidbhavananda entitled simply The Bhagavad Gita came into my possession and sat on my shelf for years, quietly beckoning but only occasionally being opened until it later became a main resource.

Some years after that, when I made the final decision to write this book, providence moved too. In quick succession I was gifted several books: M. K. Gandhi Interprets the Bhagavadgita (especially moving because he so openly lived these principles in the public eye); a pure pocket version of the Gita, published privately (and anonymously) in New Zealand, called Bhagavad Gita; and a small, well-written Bhagavad-Gita: The Song of God, translated by Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood (introduction by Aldous Huxley).

And finally, appearing at just the right moment were four positive heavyweights: a 736-page commentary Srimad Bhagavadgita Tattvavivecani by Jayadayal Goyandka, an eighteen-volume set of commentaries on the Gita by Swami Chinmayananda, a three-volume set of clear teachings, The Bhagavad Gita for Daily Living, published in the United States by Eknath Easwaran, and a new 685-page commentary on the pocket Gita mentioned above entitled Message of the Lord, also published anonymously in New Zealand.

There are other wonderful Gita books that contributed at just the right times, but the reason I single out this stack is that these are the ones I juggled on my lap and sideboard for over a year, from which my own notes and therefore this book emerged. One grows fond of something that sits on one’s lap for so long.

In addition to those books, certain individuals graciously served as advisers and sounding boards during the development of this book. I wish to thank the distinguished members of my impromptu panel both in the United States and India for their many helpful suggestions and editing ideas: Robert Ahern, Steve Hawley, Glenn Hovemann, M. Nanjundaiya, Jagdish Narain, V. K. Narasimhan, V. Pandit, S. Raghavan, K. V. Sundar Rajan, N. S. Venkatesh Varan, Laurie Viera, and G. Venkataraman.

I extend my sincere appreciation to New World Library Publisher Marc Allen, not only for this new version of the book but for his continuing love for the Gita; and to Georgia Hughes, editorial director; Kristen Cashman, managing editor; and the other talented pros at New World Library who again helped make this book better.

I also owe my everlasting love and gratitude to my grown offspring: Kathy, Alec, Owen, Shane, and Julie — all of whom continue to be my teachers.

I am, as always, indebted to Louise, my adoring wife who was given to me to teach me love during this lifetime; we have shared the joys of the Gita from the day we discovered it together on the mountaintop at Ootacamund in southwestern India. “Sisyas te ‘ham. . . . ”

I am grateful to Sathya Sai Baba, who not only wrote the inspiring Geetha Vahini mentioned above, but also inspired the original Bhagavad Gita — and to this day lives it with perfection as he relentlessly teaches through example and direct experience these same secrets daily to the thousands of “Arjunas” who journey to his ashram Prasanthi Nilayam (“Abode of the Highest Peace”). Without Him within me not one word would have been written.





BIBLIOGRAPHY





Anonymous. 1997. Bhagavad Gita. Auckland: Sai Publications Trust.

Anonymous. 1998. Message of the Lord: As a Practical Philosophy. Auckland: Sai Publications Trust.

Arnold, E. 1975. The Song Celestial: A Poetic Version of the Bhagavad Gita. Wheaton, Ill.: The Theosophical Publishing House.

Chakraborty, S. K. 1992. Management by Values. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Chakravarty, A. E. 1995. The Geeta and the Art of Successful Management. New Delhi: HarperCollins.

Chidbhavananda, Swami. 1986. The Bhagavad Gita. Tirupparaitturai (India): Sri Ramakrishna Tapovanam.

Chinmayananda, Swami. 1996. The Bhagavad Gita. Bombay: Central Chinmaya Mission Trust.

Cicogna, C. R. 1990. The Solar Way: A Reading of the Bhagavad Gita. Varallo Pombia (Italy): Omina Press.

Davidson, D., and J. Thomas. 1994. Geetha Vahini: An American Translation. Cherry Valley (Calif.): privately published (with permission).

Davies, J. 1994. Bhagwad Gita. New Delhi: Beacon Books.

Dayananda, Swami. 1995. The Teaching of the Bhagavad Gita. New Delhi: Vision Books.

Drucker, A. (Ed.). 1994. Sai Baba Gita: The Way to Self-Realization and Liberation in This Age. Prasanthinilayam (India): Sai Towers.

Easwaran, E. 1975. The Bhagavad Gita for Daily Living Petaluma (Calif.): Nilgiri Press.

Easwaran, E. 1996. The Dhammapada. New Delhi: Penguin.

Gandhi, M. K. 1993. The Bhagavadgita. Delhi: Orient Paperbacks.

Gotshalk, R. 1985. Bhagavad Gita: Translation and Commentary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Goyandka, J. 1996. Srimad Bhagavadgita Tattvavivecani. Gorakhpur (India): Gita Press.

Hawley, J. A., 1993. Reawakening the Spirit in Work: The Power of Dharmic Management. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

Huxley, A. 1944. The Perennial Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row.

Iyer, R. 1985. The Bhagavad Gita: With the Uttara Gita. London: Concord Grove Press.

Kasturi, N. 1968. Sathya Sai Geeta. Poona: Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Seva Samithi.

Krishnananda, Swami. 1991. The Philosophy of the Bhagavadgita. Shivanandanagar (India): The Divine Life Society.

Lal, P. 1993. The Bhagavadgita. New Delhi: Orient Books.

Mascaro, J. 1962. The Bhagavad Gita. London: Penguin Classics.

Mascaro, J. 1965. The Upanishads. London: Penguin Classics.

Miller, B. S. 1986. The Bhagavad-Gita: Krishna’s Counsel in Time of War. New York: Bantam.

Munshi, K. M. 1959. Krishnavatara. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.

Munshi, K. M. 1988. Bhagavad Gita and Modern Life. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.

Prabhavananda, Swami, and C. Isherwood. 1944. Bhagavad Gita: The Song of God. Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math.

Prasad, R. 1996. The Bhagavad-Gita. Fremont (Calif.): The American Gita Society.

Rajagopalachari, C. 1993. Bhagavad Gita. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.

Sargeant, W. 1994. The Bhagavad Gita (Rev. Ed.). Albany: State University of New York Press.

Sathya Sai Baba. 1966. Geethavahini (The Divine Gospel). Prasanthi Nilayam (India): Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust.

Sathya Sai Baba. 1974. Bhagavatha Vahini. Prasanthi Nilayam (India): Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust.

Sharpe, E. J. 1985. The Universal Gita. La Salle (Ill.): Open Court.

Sivananda, Swami. 1983. The Principal Upanishads. Shivanandagar (India): The Divine Life Society.

Subramaniam, K. 1987. Srimad Bhagavatam. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.

Subramaniam, K. 1989. Mahabharata. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.

Svensson, C. 1985. Bhagavad Gita or The Divine Song. Tustin, Calif.: Sathya Sai Baba Society.

Vireswarananda, Swami. 1997. Srimad Bhagavad-Gita. Mylapore, Madras (India): Sri Ramakrishna Math.

Zaehner, R. C. 1973. The Bhagavad-Gita: With a Commentary Based on the Original Sources. London: Oxford University Press.





INDEX





Each reference, instead of simply consiting of page numbers, includes the following:





• The first number or number range refers to the page number(s);



• The next two numbers are the chapter number and the paragraph number(s) separated by a colon;



• Each set of numbers (page, chapter, and paragraph) is separated by a comma, while each subentry is separated by a semicolon.





A


abhyasa (constant practice), 62 6:35, 78 8:8, 111 12:9, 158 18:37

Absolute Highest Consciousness, 30–31 3:14–15

Absolute Reality, 70 7:13, 104 11:36–37. See also Godhead

Absolute state, 80 8:16

absorption: in Atma, 41 4:10; in God/the Divine, 23 2:54, 85 9:13–14, 94 10:19; in Godhead, 45 4:24

action(s), 29 3:9, 151 18:3, 162 18:48, 163 18:56; attachment to vs. detachment from, 153–57 18:13–35; components and interactions of, 153–57 18:13–35; darmic vs. adharmic, 166 18:66; guidelines for performing, 28 3:7; and inaction, 20 2:47, 28–29 3:4–8, 43 4:18, 156 18:30; necessity of taking, 28–29 3:4–8, 33 3:30, 57 6:1; nonbinding, 29 3:9; as offering(s), 89 9:33–34; as propelled by the Divine, 34 3:30; refraining from taking, 57 6:1; reluctance to take, 48 4:42; renunciation of, 28 3:4–5, 50 5:6–7; Self-knowledge brings fearless, 48 4:42; three kinds of, 155 18:23–25; union with God through, 19 2:40. See also karma

adharma, 154 18:13–15, 166 18:66

adhi, 76 8:4

adhibhuta, 74 7:30, 75–76 8:1–4

adhidaiva(s), 74 7:30, 75–76 8:1–4

adhiyajna, 74 7:30, 75–76 8:1–4

adhyatma, 74 7:30

ahamkara, 117–18 13:5–6; principle of individuation, 117–18 13:5–6. See also ego; self

ahimsa (nonharm), 137 16:1–3

alienation, 48 4:40

alms-giving. See charity

altruism. See sacrifice

Ananta, 96 10:29

ananya bhakti (single-minded love), 106 11:54

anger, xxii, 24 2:62–63, 127 14:7, 128 14:16–17, 140 16:21; desire and, 36 3:37, 54 5:23; war against, 36–37 3:36–43

Arjuna: army, 4–7 1:2–28; becomes disciple, 12–15 2:7–24; empathy for his opponents, 8 1:38–39; family, 3–4 1:1; loss of resolve, 7–9 1:20–47, 11–12 2:2–6; overwhelmed, seeks forgiveness, 105 11:39–46; pacifism, 8 1:33–35. See also specific topics

Aryama,96 10:42529

Asat, 150 17:28. See also faith

asceticism (sanyasi/austerity), 35 3:35, 92 10:4–5, 146–48 17:14–19. See also purification

Ashvatta tree (fig tree/tree of life), 95 10:26, 131–33 15:1–6

Atma-knowledge, 96 10:32

Atma stage of spiritual development, 110 12:5

Atma (True Self Within), xxii, xxiv, 13–23 2:12–55, 40–45 4:5–27, 116 13:1–2, 120 13:11, 123 13:28, 130 14:24–25, 133 15:7–11, 135 15:17–18; action and, 154 18:16–17; as all-pervading/omnipresent, 15 2:23–24, 76 8:3; as beyond desire, 37 3:41; as beyond karma, 31–33 3:17–27; as beyond worldly matters, 51 5:8–9; bliss flowing from, 158 18:37; Brahman and, 79 8:12–13, 94 10:20, 121 13:17, 122 13:22, 123 13:28, 130 14:27; forgetting, 120 13:9; gunas and, 126 14:5; karma and, 42 4:14; keeping one’s attention in, 61 6:24–26; living in, 54–55 5:21–26, 112 12:17; as permanent and unchanging, 14–15 2:17–24; persons unaware of, 13 2:13, 40 4:5, 43 4:19, 48 4:40–42, 70–71 7:15, 132 15:5 (see also ignorance); persons who know/knowing, 28 3:3, 42 4:14, 45–48 4:27–38, 50 5:6–7, 52–54 5:16–25, 58–59 6:8, 61–62 6:27–35, 71 7:16, 73 7:29, 92 10:4–5, 123 13:28, 146 17:14, 153 18:10 (see also wisdom); pursuit of, 137 16:1–3; responsibility to, 17 2:31–33. See also adhyatma; soul

Atmadharma. See sva-dharma

Atmic Self within, 133 15:10–11

Atmic wisdom, 25 2:66

attachment(s): to action, 127 14:7; beyond worldly, 20 2:45, 69 7:11; to enjoyment, 87 9:20–21; severing one’s, 132 15:3–5; spiritual growth and surrendering, 58 6:2. See also detachment; results

attraction-aversion (raga-dvesha), 25 2:64–68, 112 12:17, 132 15:3–5

attraction (sensory), 25 2:66, 54 5:21, 127 14:7; brooding on, 24 2:62–63. See also desire (s); sense objects

Aum. See Om

austerity. See asceticism

Avatar, xxiv

awareness (jnana), 14 2:16; living in constant state of spiritual, 77–78 8:7. See also knowledge; wisdom





B


balance, between giving and getting, 30 3:12

battle: cosmic inevitability of the, 102–4 11:23–38. See also war

bhakti. See devotion; love

bhakti-yoga. See under yoga

Bhishma (field marshall/revered grandfather), 6 1:11, 12 2:4–5

Bhrigu, 95 10:25

birth, 36 3:37, 126 14:3. See also death-rebirth wheel/cycle

bliss, 23 2:55, 60 6:21–22, 115 13:1, 163 18:53; of Godhead (Brahman), 53–55 5:20–29, 61 6:27–28

body, 14 2:18; delusion that one is one’s, 13–14 2:13–16, 33 3:27, 41 4:10; giving up attachment to, no 12:5; identifying with one’s, 13–14 2:13–16, 33 3:27, 122 13:21; as Real vs. un-Real, 13–14 2:13–16. See also field; nature; subtle (body)

bondage (to worldly), 81 8:23–25

Brahma, 80 8:16–19, 159 18:40; cosmic day of, 849:6. See also Creator

Brahma-loka, 79–80 16–19

Brahman. See Godhead

Brahmin. See Seers

bravery, 18 2:36

breath. Seeprana

breath-control, 55 5:27–28

Brihaspati, the Chief Priest, 95 10:24

buddhi (higher mind), 93 10:10–11, 117 13:5–6, 156–57 18:29–32. See also discrimination; intellect





C


calmness. See peace

caste, 42 4:13, 159–61 18:41–44

charity (dana/alms-giving), 92 10:4–5, 137 16:1–3, 144 177; types and efficacy of, 148 17:20–22. See also sacrifice

Chitraratha, 95 10:26

concentration, 19 2:44, 60 6:15; on the Divine, 79 8:12–13. See also meditation

conscience, 3–4 1:1–2. See also dharma

Consciousness, 163 18:53; Cosmic, 23 2:53, 74 7:30, 77 8:5–6 (see also Godhead; Knower of the Field)

consciousness, 117 13:5–6, 133 15:15;

pure, 14 2:16, 69 7:7, 93–94 10:12–22, 129 14:19–20; source of, 68 7:4–5; three states of, 102–11:20 See also Atma

Cosmic Plan, 168 18:78

cosmos/cosmic, 68 7:4–5, 74 7:30. See also God

creation, 84 9:8–9, 86 9:18, 91–92 10:2–3

Creator, 31 3:16, 97 10:39. See also Brahma; God





D


dana. See charity

death, 86 9:19; as greatest servant of humanity, 15 2:20, 74 7:29; fear of, 73–74 7:29; how to die, 77–79 8:5–15; instant of, 26 2:72, 77 8:5–7

death-rebirth wheel/cycle, 13 2:13, 19 2:40, 30 3:14, 78 8:14–15, 80–81 8:17–25, 87 9:20–21, 122 13:21, 123 13:25–28, 125 14:1–2, 140 16:19–20; release from, 21–22 2:50, 43 4:16–17, 50 5:5, 53 5:17, 747:30, 79–80 8:15–16, 110 12:6–7, 129 14:19–20, 132 15:3–4; ties to, 29 3:9, 83 9:3

deities. See gods

delusion (moha), 22 2:52, 26 2:72; caused by anger, 24 2:62–63; that one is one’s body, 13–14 2:13–16, 33 3:27, 41 4:10. See also maya

demonic/degenerate/devilish tendencies, 137–41 16:1–24

dependence, 31 3:18

desire(s), 20–21 2:47, 35 3:34, 139–40 16:8–21; anger and, 36 3:37, 54 5:23; control over, 24 2:59–60, 78 8:11; as enemy, xxii, 140 16:21; as form of prayer, 42 4:12; fulfillment, 30 3:12; persons without/freedom from, 21–26 2:47–71, 59 6:10; unselfish, 69–70 7:11; war against, 36–37 3:36–43. See also karma(s); selfish desires

destiny, 52 5:14

destruction and destructiveness, 103 11:26–32

detachment (vairagya), 21–23 2:50–56, 62 6:35, 162 18:49. See also devotees, most loved

devas, 29 3:11

devotees, 107 11:54; four types of, 71–74 7:16–30; most loved, 111–12 12:13–20

devotion (bhakti): to God, 67 7:1, 77 8:7, 81 8:22, 87–88 9:23–31, 105–7 11:39–54; order of, 110–11 12:6–12; sacrificial acts of, 44 4:23. See also worship

devotional attitude, 35 3:34

dharma(s), 35 3:35, 41 4:7–8, 101 11:18, 104 11:34, 128 14:16–17, 154 18:13–15, 161 18:47; Arjuna’s commitment to his, 167 18:73; giving up, 166 18:66; helping humanity toward, 32 3:25; persons lacking a sense of, 138 16:7; truth-based life of, 11 2:2

Dhritarashtra (old blind king), 3–5 1:1–8

dhrti (firmness/resolve/stamina), 156 18:29, 157 18:33

dhyana yoga (path of meditation), 122–23 13:24. See also meditation

discipline (yoga), 24 2:59–60

discrimination, 62 6:35, 70 7:15, 156–57 18:29–32; loss of, 24–25 2:62–68; between Real and not-Real, 92–93 10:4–11, 117 13:5–6. See also buddhi

Divine, 34 3:30; as first cause, 78 8:9; lower and higher self, 68 7:4–5, 70 7:12 (see also Knower of the Field; prakriti). See also specific topics

Divine mystery unveiled, 84–86 9:4–19

Divine traits, 137–38 16:1–3

Divinity: essence of, 32–33 3:22–26, 35 3:34, 41 4:9–11, 68–70 7:4–11; as highest goal/ideal, 89 9:33–34; reaching, 78–79 8:10–13, 107 11:55; relationship with, 41 4:11; service of, 31 3:15; turning away from, 71 7:15; within (see Atma). See also God; specific topics

doers, three kinds of, 155 18:23–25

doership, 163–64 18:56–57

doubt, 48 4:41–42

Drona (ex-teacher), 4–5 1:2–8, 12 2:4–5

dualities, 44 4:22

Duryodhana (evil young king), 3–5 1:1–8, 7 1:20–23

duty-bound action, 29 3:8

duty(ies), xxiii, 17 2:31–33, 21 2:47, 28–29 3:8, 35 3:35, 148 17:20; failure to do one’s, 17–18 2:33–36; prescribed, 159–62 18:41–47. See also dharma; sva-dharma





E


eating, sattvic, 30 3:13–14

ego, 58 6:5–6, 68 7:4–5, 133 15:8; control/mastery over, 63 6:36, 92 10:4–5; defined, 13 2:13; freedom/detachment from, 21 2:50, 26 2:71, 43 4:15, 45 4:25–27, 50 5:3; reinforcement of, 737:27. See also“I”; “me”

ego principle, 118 13: 5–6

egoism, 33 3:27, 81 8:23–25, 164 18:58–59

enemies, 112 12:18–19; within, xxii

enemy forces, 103 11:26–30

energy, 96 10:29. See also life force; prana

enlightened persons, 20 2:46, 32 3:20, 51 5:8–9, 91–92 10:3, 135 15:19–20, 154 18:17. See also Illuminated One

enlightenment, 47 4:33–34, 141 16:24

equanimity, 21 2:48–49, 147 17:16

Eternal, the, 20 2:45, 104 11:36–37. See also immortality

Eternal Reality, 119 12:8

ethics. See dharma

evil, 41 4:7–8, 94 10:23, 96 10:28, 104 11:33, 139 16:10, 153 18:12; blindness to one’s, 8 1:38–39; root of all, 123 13:28. See also demonic

evolution/evolvement, 33 3:29, 42 4:13, 69 7:6, 72 7:21

existence, 14 2:16, 149–50 17:23–27; beyond, 80 8:20; perception of, 25 2:69; planes/levels of, 79–80 16–19. See also life

expectations, 59 6:10, 112 12:16





F


faith (sraddha/Asat), 62 6:35, 71–72 7:16–22, 143 17:1–3, 150 17:28; importance, 34 3:31, 109 12:2; lack of, 83 9:3; types of, 143–44 17:2–6

family(ies): battling against one’s, 8 1:36–37; decline of a, 9 1:40–45; unity vs. disunity, 9 1:40–45

fate, 52 5:14

fear and anxiety, 20 2:47, 51 5:12, 104 11:35–37, 112 12:15

“female” qualities, 97 10:34

field (body/matter), 116–19 13:1–6. See also Knower of the Field; natural world; prakriti

fig tree (ashvatta), 95 10:26, 131–33 15:1–6

fire, 95 10:23

flattery, 146–47 17:15;

food, 30 3:13–14; spiritual significance, 144–45 17:8–10

forgiveness, 105 11:41–46

fruits of actions. See results





G


Gandhi, Mahatma, xv

Garuda, 96 10:29

Gita: grace of, 174–76; teaching of, 171–75

God, xxiii; belief/faith in, 71 7:16; coming to know, 67–68 7:1–3, 72 7:19, 78 8:8; desire for, 35 3:34 (see also devotees); immanence in all, 134–35 15:12–20; knowing/coming to know, 67–68 7:1–3; running to, for refuge, 73 7:29; veering from, 30 3:13. See also Brahma; Creator; Divinity; specific topics

God-dedicated action. See karma yoga

God-realization, 74 7:30, 149 17:26, 160 18:42

Godhead (Brahman), xxiii, 44–45 4:24, 74 7:30, 75–76 8:1–4, 79–82 8:12–28, 83 9:1–2, 93 10:12–15, 109 12:2, 120–24 13:12–30, 129 14:19–20, 135 15:17–18; achieving the, 81 8:23–25, 161–62 18:45–50; Atma as personalized version of, 45–46 4:27; attaining the bliss of, 53–55 5:20–29, 61 6:27–28; devotees of/devotion to, 45 4:25, 71–72 7:18–20, no 12:5; knowledge of/knowing, 53 5:20, 106 11:52, 120–21 13:12–15; manifested qualities, 92 10:4–5; omniscience, 73 7:26; realizing/grasping, 72 7:24–25, 120 13:11, 120 13:12 (see also maya); selfless action as born from, 30–31 3:14–15; as source of all creation, 91–92 10:3; union with, 22 2:51, 45–46 4:24–27, 51 5:6–7, 62 6:32, 71 7:18 (see also yoga, as unity); unmanifested, 84 9:4–6

gods, 39–40 4:1–4, 42 4:12, 45 4:25, 72 7:20, 88 9:25, 102 11:21–22

goodness. See sattva

grace, 40 4:3, 94 10:23, 106 11:47–48, 164 18:58–59, 174–76

greed, xxii, 8 1:38–39, 36–37 3:39–40, 59 6:10, 127 14:7, 128 14:13, 140 16:21; control over, 24 2:59–60

guna-qualities of nature, 121–22 13:19–21. See also specific qualities

gunas (forces/strands of nature), 19–20 2:45, 122 13:21; Godhead and, 120 13:13–15, 126–27 14:5–13, 129–30 14:19–26, 131 15:2, 154 18:18–19, 158–59 18:36–41; maya and the, 70–71 7:12–15; transcending, 20 2:45, 129–30 14:21–27

gurus, 146 17:14





H


happiness, 15 2:23–24; types of, 158 18:36–39. See also pleasure; sorrow/pain, end of

hate. See malice

Hawley, Jack, xv

heart(s), 22 2:50, 23 2:55, 93 10:10–11

heaven, 17–19 2:32–43, 80 8:16, 82 8:28, 87 9:22

hell, 80 8:16, 140 16:21

Himalayas, Krishna as, 95 10:25

honor vs. dishonor. See warrior





I


“I,” 33 3:28, in 12:13–14. See also Atma; ego; Godhead; “me”

ignorance (not knowing the True Self), 15 2:23–24, 32 3:20, 81 8:23–25, 85 9:11–12, 93 10:10–11. See also Atma, persons unaware of

ignorant persons, 33 3:26–27, 48 4:40, 81 8:23–25. See also Atma, persons unaware of

Illuminated One (Sthithaprajna), 43 4:18; description, 23–26 2:55–72

illusion. See delusion; ignorance; maya

immortality/imperishability, 14–15 2:15–24, 76 8:3, 78 8:11, 80–82 8:20–28, 85 9:11, 86 9:18–19, 101 11:18, 112 12:20, 135 15:16–18

individuality, sense of, 73 7:27. See also ahamkara; ego

individuation, 117–18 13:5–6

Indra, 94 10:22

indriyas. See sense organs

Indweller. See Atma

integration. See union; unity; yoga

intellect/understanding, 22 2:52, 37 3:40, 92 10:4–5, 117 5–6, 156–57 18:29–32. See also buddhi

intelligence, 78 8:9, 116 13:1; as power to interpret, 118 13:5–6





J


Janaka (king, ancient karma-yogi), 32 3:20

japa (repetition), 95 10:25

jealousy, 3 1:1

jiva (individual soul), 122 13:21, 127 14:6, 133 15:7–10; enlightenment, 132–33 15:6

jivanmukti, 122 13:22

jivatma (individual soul), 133 14:9

jnana. See awareness; knowledge; wisdom

jnana yoga (path of knowledge), 50 5:5

jnanis (wise yogis), 43 4:18–19, 129–30 14:21–25

joy. See happiness

judgment, 20 2:45, 59 6:9





K


kalpa, 84 9:7

kama. See desire(s)

Kapila, 95 10:26

karma yoga (path of selfless action), 18–19 2:39–41, 49–50 5:1–5, 57–58 6:1–2, 123 13:24, 130 14:26. See also selfless action

karma-yogi, 32 3:20, 50–51 5:6–12, 58 6:1

karma(s), xxiv, 122 13:23, 140 16:19, 164 18:60; as action/works, 43 4:16–18, 154 18:17; vs. akarma, 156 18:30; as consequence of action, 21 2:50, 33 3:27, 34 3:31, 42–43 4:14–18, 52 5:15, 86 9:17, 88 9:28, 153 18:12; freedom from wheel of, 34 3:31, 42–44 4:14–23, 47–48 4:37–41, 122 13:23, 154 18:17, 162 18:49; law of, 63 6:41–43, 164 18:60. See also action(s); desire(s)

killing, 104 11:34; vs. being killed, 15 2:19

Knower of the Field (Purusha), 68 7:4–5, 101–2 11:18, 115–16 13:1–3, 119–20 13:7–11; union of field and, 121–24 13:19–34. See also Consciousness, Cosmic

knowing, 37 3:44; the knower, 120–21 13:12–18

knowledge (jnana), 47 4:33–36, c, 6 10:32, 165 18:63; and action, 27–28 3:1–7, 83 9:3, in 12:12; of Divinity, 67–68 7:2–3, 73 7:29, 83 9:3; zenith of all, 14 2:16; self-realization and, 37 3:43. See also specific topics

Krishna: promise, xx, 6 1:14–15, 63–64 6:37–47; becomes Divine Teacher, 12–15 2:7–24; declaration, 40–42 4:6–13; essence of his teachings, 79 8:14; final message, 176; reveals his wondrous cosmic form, 100–102 11:8–22; reveals the battle’s cosmic inevitability, 102–4 11:23–38

Kshatriyas (Leaders), 160 18:43

kshetra. See field

kshetrajna. See Knower of the Field

Kubera, 95 10:23

kundalini (coiled energy), 96 10:29





L


Leaders. See Kshatriyas

liberation (moksha), 49 5:2, 68 7:3

life: ideal attitude in which to live, 21 2:49; as inner battle/struggle, xxii; purpose/goal of, xxiii, 21–26 2:50–72, 29 3:9, 107 11:55, 131 15:1, 132 15:3–4, 152 18:5. See also death-rebirth wheel/cycle

life force (energy), 13 2:12–13, 68 7:4–5, 79 8:12–13. See also Atma; prana

light, 132 15:6

loka (worlds/planes of existence), 79–80 16–19

Lord, 41 4:11, 45 4:25, 60 6:21–22

love (bhakti/ devotion), 81 8:22, 85 9:13–14, 88 9:26, 106 11:54, 109 12:1, 163 18:54–55; Divine, 82 8:28, 106 11:47–48, 123 13:24 (see also devotees, most loved)

lust (kama), 139 16:8–11. See also desire(s)





M


mahat (“great cause”), 117 13:5–6

mahatmas (“great souls”), 85 9:13–14

malice, 107 11:55

manas. See mind

manifested vs. unmanifested, 80 8:17–19, 93 10:12–15, 109–10 12:1–4

mantras (chanted hymns/prayers), 146–47 17:13–15

Manu, 39 4:1

manus, 92 10:6

Margasirsha, 97 10:35

matter, inert, 68 7:4–6, 118–19 13:5–6. See also prakriti

maya (illusion), 40 4:6, 70 7:13–14, 73 7:26, 123 13:28. See also delusion

“me” and “mine” (ego/doership), 26 2:71, in 12:13–14, 149 17:25, 163 18:53

medhanadhi (new sense), 60 6:11

meditation (dhyana/spiritual discipline), 25 2:66, 59 6:10, 62 6:35, 72 7:19, in 12:12, 122–23 13:24; on the Divine, 53–54 5:21, 78 8:8; method, 59–60 6:10–22; path of (dhyana yoga), 122–23 13:24

merger. See union

mind (manas), 37 3:40, 68 7:4–5, 118 13:5–6; higher (see buddhi; intellect); steadiness/firmness of, 19–20 2:41–45, 157 18:33–35

moksha. See liberation

mother-infant relationship, 87 9:22





N


natural world, 68 7:4–5

nature, 68–69 7:4–6, 82 8:28; elements/components of, 95 10:23, 117–19 5–6 (see also gunas); four purifiers in, 96 10:30; proximity to Divinity, 84 9:8. See also body; creation; field; matter; prakriti

Nirguna Brahman, 110 12:3–4

nirguna (invisible/formless), 109–10 12:1–4. See also unmanifested

nonattachment. See detachment





O


object (of senses), 118 13:5–6

Om (Aum), 69 7:8, 79 8:12–13, 86 9:17, 95 10:25, 149 17:24

Om Tat Sat, 149–50 17:23–27

omnipresence, 15 2:23–24, 88 9:29, 93 10:12–15, 101 11:16–17, 133 15:15

oneness. See union; unity

opposites, pairs of (raga-dve-sha/dualities), 44 4:22, 130 14:24–25





P


pacifism of Arjuna, 8 1:33–35

pain. See sorrow/pain; suffering

path(s)/pathway(s), 18–19 2:39, 49–50 5:1–5, 122–23 13:24–25, 130 14:26; for the individual soul, 81 8:23–25. See also knowledge (jnana), and action; yoga

patience, 92 10:4–5

peace, inner, 13–14 2:15, 20–21 2:47, 25 2:64–66, 26 2:71, 48 4:39, 49 5:2, 51 5:12, 58 6:8, 61 6:24–28, 92 10:4–5, 153 18:9; follow the giving up of expectations, 111 12:12. See also meditation; sattva

perfect, how one becomes, 162–65 18:50–62

perfection/perfect human, 42 4:13, 68 7:3, 111–12 12:13–20, 125 14:1

pleasure, 30 3:13, 127 14:6; renunciation of, 23–24 2:56–60. See also bliss; desire(s); happiness

possessions, 59 6:10

Prahlada, 96 10:30

prakriti (nature/matter), 116 13:5–6, 121 13:19, 125–26 14:1–4, 154 18:17, 159 18:40. See also field; matter; nature

prana (primordial energy/vitality/breath), 46 4:29–30, 134 15:13–14, 157 18:33. See also life force

prarabdha, 154 18:13–15

prasad (gift), 174–76. See also grace

Prasad Zone, 174–76

prayer, 42 4:12, 71 7:16, 87 9:22–24, 146–47 17:13–15

princely class. See Kshatriyas; warrior

Providers (Vaishyas), 160–61 18:44

purification, 48 4:38, 51–53 5:11–17, 73 7:28, 92 10:4–5, 146–48 17:14–19. See also asceticism; tapas

purifying knowledge, 83 9:1–2

purity, 51–53 5:11–17, 88 9:30–31, 119 12:7, 153 18:9

purpose, of existence. See under life

Purusha. See Consciousness, Cosmic; Knowerofthe Field; Self

Purushottama (Supreme Absolute Highest Self), 135 15:19





R


raga-dvesha. See attraction-aversion; opposites

rajas, 121 13:19, 126–29 14:5–23

rajasic, 122 13:21, 126–29 14:5–20, 143–46 17:2–12, 148 17:21, 152 18:8

rajasic doers, 156 18:28

rajasic firmness of mind, 157 18:34

rajasic happiness, 158 18:38

rajasic intellect, 156 18:31

rajasic knowledge, persons of, 155 18:21

rajasic work/action, 155 18:21–24

Rakshasas, 94–95 10:23

Rama, 96 10:31

Real (eternal/never-changing/ceaseless), 14 2:16, 70 7:13; vs. non-Real, 48 4:38, 70 7:15, 72 7:22, 92–93 10:4–11, 117 13:5–6, 151 18:3

Reality, 14 2:17, 135 15:19; defined, 14 2:16; three aspects of (see gunas)

rebirth (reincarnation): moment of death and, 77 8:7, 79 8:14. See also death-rebirth wheel/cycle

relinquishment (tyaga). See detachment

renunciation (sanyasa), 35 3:35, 49–50 5:1–4, 57–58 6:1–2, 151–53 18:1–11; path of, 88 9:28. See also asceticism; detachment; tyaga

respect, 18 2:36

results/reward (fruit of actions), 51 5:10, 72 7:22–23, 86–88 9:17–31, 124 13:32; attachment to vs. detachment from, 20–22 2:47–51, 28–29 3:4–9, 32 3:19, 33 3:30, 43 4:19, 48 4:41, 57 6:1–2, 84 9:9, 88 9:28, 145 17:11, 153 18:9–10, 155–56 18:24–26, 161 18:46

ritual, 146 17:13

role models, great persons as, 32 3:21

Rudra, 94 10:23





S


sacrifice (yajna), 76 8:4, 137 16:1–3, 144 17:7; law of, 29–31 3:9–16; offering up/worshipping, 29 3:10–11, 44 4:23; of one’s life, for a cause, 17 2:34; types and efficacy of spiritual, 145–46 17:11–13; wheel of, 29 3:8, 31 3:16. See also charity

sages. See Seers/sages

Saguna Brahman, 109 12:1–2

saguna (visible/with form), 109 12:1–2. See also manifested

Sama Veda, 94 10:22

Sanjaya, 3–9 1:1–47, " 2:2, 100 11:9–11

sanyasa/sanyasi. See renunciation

Sat. See existence

sattva, 41 4:7–8, 97 10:36, 121 13:19, 126–29 14:5–23, 159 18:42

sattvic, 122 13:21, 126–29 14:5–20, 143–45 17:2–8, 148 17:20, 153 18:9–10

sattvic actions/work, 155 18:23

sattvic doers, 155–56 18:26

sattvic firmness of mind, 157 18:33

sattvic happiness, 158 18:38

sattvic intellect. See buddhi

sattvic knowledge, persons of, 154–55 18:20

sattvic nature, persons of, 159 18:42

scripture(s), 19 2:45, 81–82 8:28, 155 18:23, 171; function, 141 16:23–24

Seers (Brahmins/priestly class), 159–60 18:42

seers (kavis), 97 10:37

seers (rishis), 95 10:25

seers/sages, 39 4:2–3, 43 4:16–17, 92 10:6, 151 18:3, 152 18:6; of truth, 123–24 13:28–29

self, individual, 37 3:44, 58 6:5–6; lower, 73 7:28 (see also Divine, lower and higher self); using one’s Self to control one’s, 37 3:44. See also ahamkara; ego

self-controlled persons, 52 5:13, 78 8:11. See also yogi(s)

Self (cosmic), 17 2:33, 135 15:19; knowing the Divinity of, 154 18:20; and non-Self 120 13:11; realization of, 28 3:4–5; wisdom of, 53 5:18. See also Atma

self-discipline. See tapas

Self-knowlege/Self-knowing, 45 4:26; power of, 47–48 4:36–42

self-realization, 37 3:42, 60 6:15, 71 7:16

self-restraint, 92 10:4–5

Self-sufficiency, 31 3:18

self-surrender, 166 18:66. See also ego

selfish desires, 19 2:41–44, 51 5:12; freedom from/abandonment of, 23 2:55, 55 5:26, 58 6:2, 61 6:24–26; spiritual growth and, 58 6:2. See also egoism; ignorant persons

selfish sacrifice, 145–46 17:12

selfless action, 21 2:47, 29–31 3:9–15, 34 3:31, 152 18:6; secret of, 18–19 2:39–41. See also karma yoga; sacrifice

selfless souls, 81 8:23–25

sense control, 24 2:59–61, 45 4:26–27, 48 4:39, 55 5:27–28, 59 6:10

sense objects, 24 2:62–63, 118 13:5–6. See also attraction (sensory)

sense organs (ten), 94 10:22, 118 13:5–6; organs of action and perception, 118 13:5–6

senses, 34 3:34, 37 3:40; indulging the, 31 3:16

separateness, illusion of, 123 13:28

serenity. See equanimity; peace

Servers (Sudras), 160–61 18:44

Shiva, 94 10:23

sin, 46 4:30, 54 5:25, 88 9:30–31; defined, 30 3:13. See also demonic

Skanda, 95 10:24

snakes, 96 10:28–29

sorrow/pain, 17 2:30, 22 2:51, 23 2:56; end of, 15 2:23–24, 25 2:64–65, 29 3:10, 60–61 6:16–23, 110 12:6–7, 158–59 18:36–40; grace through, 94 10:23

soul, 133 14:9; paths for the individual, 81 8:23–25; universal (see God). See also Atma; buddhi; jiva

spirit (life consciousness), 69, 7:6

Spirit (Purusha/Knower of the field), 115 13:1, 135 15:16; union between nature/matter and, 123 13:26–27, 126 14:4

spirits, worshipping elemental, 88 9:25

spiritual awareness. See awareness

spiritual growth: basis of all, 58 6:2. See also specific topics

spiritual knowledge. See knowledge spiritual practices (three), 149–50 17:23–28. See also specific practices

sraddha. See faith

Sthithaprajna. See Illuminated One subtle (body), 37 3:42, 68 7:4–5, 78 8:9; water as steam, 124 13:32

Sudras (Servers), 160–61 18:44

suffering (pain/sorrow), 13–15 2:15–24, 81 8:26, 88 9:27, 128 14:16–17

sukha (joy/happiness), 158 18:36–39

surrender, 12–13 2:7–10, 89 9:33–34, 112 12:20, 133 15:11. See also detachment

surrendering one’s life to an ideal, 17 2:34

Surya (Sun God), 39 4:1, 40 4:4

sva-dharma (personal dharma/Atma-dharma), 17 2:31–33





T


tamas, 121 13:19, 126–29 14:5–18, 157 18:35

tamasic austerities, 148 17:19

tamasic charities, 148 17:22

tamasic doers, 156 18:28

tamasic faith, 143 17:2–13

tamasic firmness of mind, 157 18:35

tamasic happiness, 158 18:39

tamasic intellect, 157 18:32

tamasic mentality and behavior, 128–29 14:14–20

tamasic persons, 122 13:21, 126 14:5, 144–46 17:4–13, 152 18:7, 155 18:22, 157 18:35

tapas (pennance/refinement), 92 10:4–5, 137 16:1–3, 144 177, 146 17:14. See also discipline

Tat (“It”/God), 149–50 17:23–27

Thing-in-Itself, 80–81 8:20–21

three worlds, the, 135 15:17–18

Time, 103 11:32

time, 15 2:23–24, 68 7:3, 9610:30; beyond, 80 8:20

transcendent state, 22 2:51 transmuting one’s own nature, 33–37

3:27–43

True Self Within. See Atma

Truth, 73 7:26, 135 15:19, 163 18:53; living by vs. violating one’s inner, 35 3:35. See also conscience; dharma

truth-based life. See dharma

truthfulness, 146 17:15

truth(s): highest, 165–68 18:63–78; seeing the, 12 2:2–3

tyaga (giving up/relinquishing), in 12:12, 151–52 18:1–4. See also detachment; renunciation





U


union: with God/Divinity, 19–24 2:44–61, 26 2:72, 32 3:19, 73 7:27, 74 7:30, 77 8:5–6, 85 9:13–14, 89 9:32; of nature and spirit, 6c, 7:6. See also yoga

unity, 61 6:29, 95 10:26; with all, 48 4:40; with God (yoga), 53 5:19, 81 8:22, 123 13:28

unmanifested, 16 2:25–28, 84 9:4–7, 117 13:5–6

Usana, 97 10:37





V


vairagya. See detachment

Vaishyas (Providers), 160–61 18:44

Varuna, 96 10:29

Vasuki, 96 10:28

Vedas, xvii, 94 10:22, 97 10:35

vibhutis (Divine manifestations/God’s glories), 98 10:40–41

vichara, 62 6:35

vijnana (wisdom), 67–68 7:2–3 virtues, Divine human, 138 16:1–3. See also Divine traits

Vyasa, 97 10:37





W


“Walkthrough” metaphor, xix

war, xxiv, 27 3:1–2, 168 18:78, 169–70; as highest duty, 17 2:31–34. See also battle

warrior (man of honor), 14 2:18, 48 4:42; duty, 164 18:58–59; personal karma, 17–18 2:31–38

wealth, 46 4:28, 95 10:23

will, 62 6:35. See also ego

wisdom (jnana), 37 3:42, 92 10:4–5; of Divinity, 67–68 7:2–3; as highest goal, 48 4:39; light of, 52–53 5:16–19; persons of, 33 3:28–29, 52–54 5:17–25, 71 7:16–18 (see also Illuminated One; jnanis; yogi (s))

women, 89 9:32. See also “female” qualities

work (action/karma): with attachment, 333:29. See also action(s)

workers. See Servers

worship, 61 6:31, 72 7:23, 88 9:25, 109–11 12:1–10; sacrifice as, 29 3:11; various attitudes of, 44–47 4:24–35





Y


yajna. See sacrifice

Yakshas, 94–95 10:23

Yama, 96 10:29

yoga, as pathway, 130 14:26; bhakti yoga (path of devotion), 123 13:24, 130 14:26; dhyanayoga (path of meditation), 122–23 iy:24; jhana yoga (path of knowledge), 123 13:24, 130 14:26. See also karma yoga; path(s)

yoga, as unity, 21 2:48, 58 6:4, 60 6:18–19. See also union

yogic powers, 4 1:2

yogi (s), 22 2:5l, 58–64 6:15–47, 81–82 8:27–28, 120 13:10, 133 14:10, 161–62 18:46–50, 165 18:61; action, inaction, and, 43 4:18, 52 5:13; contribute to purity of world by giving, IJ2 18:6; highest of all, 62 6:32; imperfect, 63 6:37–39; wisdom and devotion, 74 7:30, 92–93 10:8–9 (see alsojnanis). See also self-controlled persons

yugas (earthly cycles), 80 8:17–19



Table of Contents
Foreword
Introduction
1 The War Within
2 Self-Realization
3 Selfless Service
4 Wisdom in Action
5 Renounce & Rejoice
6 The Practice of Meditation
7 Wisdom from Realization
8 The Eternal Godhead
9 The Royal Path
10 Divine Splendor
11 The Cosmic Vision
12 The Way of Love
13 The Field & the Knower
14 The Forces of Evolution
15 The Supreme Self
16 Two Paths

17 The Power of Faith
18 Freedom & Renunciation
Notes
Glossary
Index

Foreword

The Classics of
Indian Spirituality
Imagine a vast hall in Anglo-Saxon England, not long after the passing of
King Arthur. It is the dead of winter and a fierce snowstorm rages outside,
but a great fire fills the space within the hall with warmth and light. Now
and then, a sparrow darts in for refuge from the weather. It appears as if
from nowhere, flits about joyfully in the light, and then disappears again,
and where it comes from and where it goes next in that stormy darkness, we
do not know.
Our lives are like that, suggests an old story in Bede’s medieval history
of England. We spend our days in the familiar world of our five senses, but
what lies beyond that, if anything, we have no idea. Those sparrows are
hints of something more outside – a vast world, perhaps, waiting to be
explored. But most of us are happy to stay where we are. We may even be a
bit afraid to venture into the unknown. What would be the point, we ask.
Why should we leave the world we know?
Yet there are always a few who are not content to spend their lives
indoors. Simply knowing there is something unknown beyond their reach
makes them acutely restless. They have to see what lies outside – if only, as
George Mallory said of Everest, “because it’s there.”
This is true of adventurers of every kind, but especially of those who
seek to explore not mountains or jungles but consciousness itself: whose
real drive, we might say, is not so much to know the unknown as to know
the knower. Such men and women can be found in every age and every
culture. While the rest of us stay put, they quietly slip out to see what lies
beyond.
Then, so far as we can tell, they disappear. We have no idea where they
have gone; we can’t even imagine. But every now and then, like friends
who have run off to some exotic land, they send back reports: breathless
messages describing fantastic adventures, rambling letters about a world
beyond ordinary experience, urgent telegrams begging us to come and see.

“Look at this view! Isn’t it breathtaking? Wish you could see this. Wish you
were here.”
The works in this set of translations – the Upanishads, the Bhagavad
Gita, and the Dhammapada – are among the earliest and most universal of
messages like these, sent to inform us that there is more to life than the
everyday experience of our senses. The Upanishads are the oldest, so varied
that we feel some unknown collectors must have tossed into a jumble all the
photos, postcards, and letters from this world that they could find, without
any regard for source or circumstance. Thrown together like this, they form
a kind of ecstatic slide show – snapshots of towering peaks of
consciousness taken at various times by different observers and dispatched
with just the barest kind of explanation. But those who have traveled those
heights will recognize the views: “Oh, yes, that’s Everest from the
northwest – must be late spring. And here we’re south, in the full snows of
winter.”
The Dhammapada, too, is a collection – traditionally, sayings of the
Buddha, one of the very greatest of these explorers of consciousness. In this
case the messages have been sorted, but not by a scheme that makes sense
to us today. Instead of being grouped by theme or topic, they are gathered
according to some dominant characteristic like a symbol or metaphor –
flowers, birds, a river, the sky – that makes them easy to commit to
memory. If the Upanishads are like slides, the Dhammapada seems more
like a field guide. This is lore picked up by someone who knows every step
of the way through these strange lands. He can’t take us there, he explains,
but he can show us the way: tell us what to look for, warn about missteps,
advise us about detours, tell us what to avoid. Most important, he urges us
that it is our destiny as human beings to make this journey ourselves.
Everything else is secondary.
And the third of these classics, the Bhagavad Gita, gives us a map and
guidebook. It gives a systematic overview of the territory, shows various
approaches to the summit with their benefits and pitfalls, offers
recommendations, tells us what to pack and what to leave behind. More
than either of the others, it gives the sense of a personal guide. It asks and
answers the questions that you or I might ask – questions not about
philosophy or mysticism, but about how to live effectively in a world of
challenge and change. Of these three, it is the Gita that has been my own
personal guidebook, just as it was Mahatma Gandhi’s.

These three texts are very personal records of a landscape that is both real
and universal. Their voices, passionately human, speak directly to you and
me. They describe the topography of consciousness itself, which belongs as
much to us today as to these largely anonymous seers thousands of years
ago. If the landscape seems dark in the light of sense perception, they tell
us, it has an illumination of its own, and once our eyes adjust we can see in
what Western mystics call this “divine dark” and verify their descriptions
for ourselves.
And this world, they insist, is where we belong. This wider field of
consciousness is our native land. We are not cabin-dwellers, born to a life
cramped and confined; we are meant to explore, to seek, to push the limits
of our potential as human beings. The world of the senses is just a base
camp: we are meant to be as much at home in consciousness as in the world
of physical reality.
This is a message that thrills men and women in every age and culture. It
is for such kindred spirits that these texts were originally composed, and it
is for them in our own time that I undertook these translations, in the
conviction that they deserve an audience today as much as ever. If these
books speak to even a handful of such readers, they will have served their
purpose.

Introduction

The Bhagavad Gita
Many years ago, when I was still a graduate student, I traveled by train
from central India to Simla, then the summer seat of the British government
in India. We had not been long out of Delhi when suddenly a chattering of
voices disturbed my reverie. I asked the man next to me if something had
happened. “Kurukshetra!” he replied. “The next stop is Kurukshetra!”
I could understand the excitement. Kurukshetra, “the field of the Kurus,”
is the setting for the climactic battle of the Mahabharata, the vastest epic in
any world literature, on which virtually every Hindu child in India is raised.
Its characters, removed in time by some three thousand years, are as
familiar to us as our relatives. The temper of the story is utterly
contemporary; I can imagine it unfolding in the nuclear age as easily as in
the dawn of Indian history. The Mahabharata is literature at its greatest – in
fact, it has been called a literature in itself, comparable in its breadth and
depth and characterization to the whole of Greek literature or Shakespeare.
But what makes it unique is that embedded in this literary masterpiece is
one of the finest mystical documents the world has seen: the Bhagavad
Gita.
I must have heard the Gita recited thousands of times when I was
growing up, but I don’t suppose it had any special significance for me then.
Not until I went to college and met Mahatma Gandhi did I begin to
understand why nothing in the long, rich stretch of Indian culture has had a
wider appeal, not only within India but outside as well. Today, after more
than thirty years of devoted study, I would not hesitate to call it India’s most
important gift to the world. The Gita has been translated into every major
language and perhaps a hundred times into English alone; commentaries on
it are said to be more numerous than on any other scripture. Like the
Sermon on the Mount, it has an immediacy that sweeps away time, place,
and circumstance. Addressed to everyone, of whatever background or
status, the Gita distills the loftiest truths of India’s ancient wisdom into
simple, memorable poetry that haunts the mind and informs the affairs of
everyday life.

Everyone in our car got down from the train to wander for a few minutes
on the now peaceful field. Thousands of years ago this was Armageddon.
The air rang with the conch-horns and shouts of battle for eighteen days.
Great phalanxes shaped like eagles and fish and the crescent moon surged
back and forth in search of victory, until in the end almost every warrior in
the land lay slain.
“Imagine!” my companion said to me in awe. “Bhishma and Drona
commanded their armies here. Arjuna rode here, with Sri Krishna himself
as his charioteer. Where you’re standing now – who knows? – Arjuna might
have sat, his bow and arrows on the ground, while Krishna gave him the
words of the Bhagavad Gita.”
The thought was thrilling. I felt the way Schliemann must have when he
finally reached that desolate bluff of western Turkey and knew he was
standing “on the ringing plains of windy Troy,” walking the same ground as
Achilles, Odysseus, Hector, and Helen. Yet at the same time, I felt I knew
the setting of the Gita much more intimately than I could ever know this
peaceful field. The battlefield is a perfect backdrop, but the Gita’s subject is
the war within, the struggle for self-mastery that every human being must
wage if he or she is to emerge from life victorious.
THE GITA AND ITS SETTING

Historians surmise that like the Iliad, the Mahabharata might well be based
on actual events, culminating in a war that took place somewhere around
1000 B.C. – close, that is, to the very dawn of recorded Indian history. This
guess has recently been supported by excavations at the ancient city of
Dvaraka, which, according to the Mahabharata, was destroyed and
submerged in the sea after the departure of its divine ruler, Krishna. Only
five hundred years or so before this, by generally accepted guess, Aryan
tribes originally from the area between the Caspian Sea and the Hindu Kush
mountains had migrated into the Indian subcontinent, bringing the
prototype of the Sanskrit language and countless elements of belief and
culture that have been part of the Hindu tradition ever since. The oldest part
of the most ancient of Hindu scriptures, the Rig Veda, dates from this period
– about 1500 B.C., if not earlier.
Yet the wellspring of Indian religious faith, I believe, can be traced to a
much earlier epoch. When the Aryans entered the Indian subcontinent
through the mountains of the Hindu Kush, they encountered a civilization

on the banks of the Indus river that archeologists date back as far as 3000
B.C. Roughly contemporaneous with the pyramid-builders on the Nile,
these Indus-dwellers achieved a comparable level of technology. They had
metalworkers skilled in sheet-making, riveting, and casting of copper and
bronze, crafts and industries with standardized methods of production, land
and sea trade with cultures as far away as Mesopotamia, and well-planned
cities with water supply and public sanitation systems unequaled until the
Romans. Evidence suggests that they may have used a decimal system of
measurement. But most remarkable, images of Shiva as Yogeshvara, the
Lord of Yoga, suggest that meditation was practiced in a civilization which
flourished a millennium before the Vedas were committed to an oral
tradition.
If this is so, it would imply that the same systematic attitude the Indus
Valley dwellers applied to their technology was applied also to study of the
mind. This was brahmavidya, the “supreme science” – supreme because
where other sciences studied the external world, brahmavidya sought
knowledge of an underlying reality which would inform all other studies
and activities.
Whatever its origins, in the early part of the first millennium B.C. we
find clearly stated both the methods and the discoveries of brahmavidya.
With this introspective tool the inspired rishis (literally “seers”) of ancient
India analyzed their awareness of human experience to see if there was
anything in it that was absolute. Their findings can be summarized in three
statements which Aldous Huxley, following Leibnitz, has called the
Perennial Philosophy because they appear in every age and civilization: (1)
there is an infinite, changeless reality beneath the world of change; (2) this
same reality lies at the core of every human personality; (3) the purpose of
life is to discover this reality experientially: that is, to realize God while
here on earth. These principles and the interior experiments for realizing
them were taught systematically in “forest academies” or ashrams – a
tradition which continues unbroken after some three thousand years.
The discoveries of brahmavidya were systematically committed to
memory (and eventually to writing) in the Upanishads, visionary documents
that are the earliest and purest statement of the Perennial Philosophy. How
many of these precious records once existed no one knows; a dozen that
date from Vedic times have survived as part of the Hindu canon of
authority, the four Vedas. All have one unmistakable hallmark: the vivid

stamp of personal mystical experience. These are records of direct
encounter with the divine. Tradition calls them shruti: literally “heard,” as
opposed to learned; they are their own authority. By convention, only the
Vedas (including their Upanishads) are considered shruti, based on direct
knowledge of God.
According to this definition, all other Indian scriptures – including the
Gita – are secondary, dependent on the higher authority of the Vedas.
However, this is a conventional distinction and one that might disguise the
nature of the documents it classifies. In the literal sense the Gita too is
shruti, owing its authority not to other scriptures but to the fact that it set
down the direct mystical experience of a single author. Shankara, a
towering mystic of the ninth century A.D. whose word carries the authority
of Augustine, Eckhart, and Aquinas all in one, must have felt this, for in
selecting the minimum sources of Hinduism he passed over almost a
hundred Upanishads of Vedic authority to choose ten central Upanishads
and the Bhagavad Gita.
The Gita, I would argue, is not an integral part of the Mahabharata. It is
essentially an Upanishad, and my conjecture is that it was set down by an
inspired seer (traditionally Vyasa) and inserted into the epic at the
appropriate place. Other elements were added in this way to the
Mahabharata, and to other popular secondary scriptures; it is an effective
way of preserving new material in an oral tradition. There is also traditional
weight behind this idea, for as far back as anyone can trace, each chapter of
the Gita has ended with the same formula: “In the Bhagavad-Gita
Upanishad, the text on the supreme science [brahmavidya] of yoga, this is
the chapter entitled . . .”
Finally, by way of further support, we can observe that except for its first
chapter, which sets the stage, the Gita not only does not develop the action
of the Mahabharata but is rather at odds with it. Battle lines are drawn – the
climax of decades of dissension – and on the eve of combat, Prince Arjuna
loses his nerve and asks his charioteer, Krishna, what to do. Then what?
Krishna – no ordinary charioteer, but an incarnation of God – enters into
some seven hundred verses of sublime instruction on the nature of the soul
and its relation to God, the levels of consciousness and reality, the makeup
of the phenomenal world, and so on, culminating in a stupendous mystical
experience in which he reveals himself to Arjuna as the transcendent Lord
of life and death. He counsels Arjuna to be compassionate to friend and

enemy alike, to see himself in every person, to suffer others’ sorrows as his
own. Then the Gita is over, the narration picks up again, and battle is joined
– a terrible, desperate slaughter compromising everyone’s honor, by the end
of which Arjuna’s side emerges victorious. But almost every man of
fighting age on both sides has been slain. Only great genius would have
placed the Gita in such a dramatic setting, but it stands out from the rest as a
timeless, practical manual for daily living.
To those who take this dramatic setting as part of the spiritual instruction
and get entangled in the question of the Gita justifying war, Gandhi had a
practical answer: just base your life on the Gita sincerely and systematically
and see if you find killing or even hurting others compatible with its
teachings. (He makes the same point of the Sermon on the Mount.) The
very heart of the Gita’s message is to see the Lord in every creature and act
accordingly, and the scripture is full of verses to spell out what this means:
I am ever present to those who have realized me in every creature.
Seeing all life as my manifestation, they are never separated from me.
They worship me in the hearts of all, and all their actions proceed from
me. Wherever they may live, they abide in me. (6:30–31)
When a person responds to the joys and sorrows of others as if they
were his own, he has attained the highest state of spiritual union. (6:32)
That one I love who is incapable of ill will, who is friendly and
compassionate. (12:13)
They alone see truly who see the Lord the same in every creature, who
see the deathless in the hearts of all that die. Seeing the same Lord
everywhere, they do not harm themselves or others. Thus they attain the
supreme goal. (13:27–28)
Scholars can debate the point forever, but when the Gita is practiced, I
think, it becomes clear that the struggle the Gita is concerned with is the
struggle for self-mastery. It was Vyasa’s genius to take the whole great
Mahabharata epic and see it as metaphor for the perennial war between the
forces of light and the forces of darkness in every human heart. Arjuna and
Krishna are then no longer merely characters in a literary masterpiece.
Arjuna becomes Everyman, asking the Lord himself, Sri Krishna, the

perennial questions about life and death – not as a philosopher, but as the
quintessential man of action. Thus read, the Gita is not an external dialogue
but an internal one: between the ordinary human personality, full of
questions about the meaning of life, and our deepest Self, which is divine.
There is, in fact, no other way to read the Gita and grasp it as spiritual
instruction. If I could offer only one key to understanding this divine
dialogue, it would be to remember that it takes place in the depths of
consciousness and that Krishna is not some external being, human or
superhuman, but the spark of divinity that lies at the core of the human
personality. This is not literary or philosophical conjecture; Krishna says as
much to Arjuna over and over: “I am the Self in the heart of every creature,
Arjuna, and the beginning, middle, and end of their existence” (10:20).
In such statements the Gita distills the essence of the Upanishads, not
piecemeal but comprehensively, offering their lofty insights as a manual not
of philosophy but of everyday human activity – a handbook of the Perennial
Philosophy unique in world history.
THE UPANISHADIC BACKGROUND

The Gita, naturally enough, takes for granted that its audience is familiar
with the basic ideas of Hindu religious thought, almost all of which can be
found in the Upanishads. It also uses some technical vocabulary from yoga
psychology. All this needs to be explained in contemporary terms if the
modern reader is to grasp what is essential and timeless in the Gita’s
message and not get bogged down in strange terminology.
First, however, the non-Hindu faces a third obstacle: the multiplicity of
names used for aspects of God. From the earliest times, Hinduism has
proclaimed one God while accommodating worship of him (or her, for to
millions God is the Divine Mother) in many different names. “Truth is
one,” says a famous verse of the Rig Veda; “people call it by various
names.” Monastic devotees might find that Shiva embodies the austere
detachment they seek; devotees who want to live “in the world,” partaking
of its innocent pleasures but devoted to service of their fellow creatures,
might find in Krishna the perfect incarnation of their ideals. In every case,
this clothing of the Infinite in human form serves to focus a devotee’s love
and to provide an inspiring ideal. But whatever form is worshipped, it is
only an aspect of the same one God.

In the Gita – in fact, virtually everywhere in Hindu myth and scripture –
we also encounter “the gods” in the plural. These are the devas, deities
which seem to have come in with the Aryans and which have recognizable
counterparts in other Aryan-influenced cultures: Indra, god of war and
storm; Varuna, god of waters and a moral overseer; Agni, god of fire, the
Hermes-like intermediary between heaven and earth; and so on. The Gita
refers to the devas as being worshipped by those who want to propitiate
natural and supernatural powers, in much the same way that ancestors were
worshipped. In modern terms, they can best be understood as personifying
the forces of nature.
This question out of the way, we can proceed to the Upanishadic
background the Gita assumes.
Atman and Brahman

The Upanishads are not systematic philosophy; they are more like ecstatic
slide shows of mystical experience – vivid, disjointed, stamped with the
power of direct personal encounter with the divine. If they seem to embrace
contradictions, that is because they do not try to smooth over the seams of
these experiences. They simply set down what the rishis saw, viewing the
ultimate reality from different levels of spiritual awareness, like snapshots
of the same object from different angles: now seeing God as utterly
transcendent, for example, now seeing God as immanent as well. These
differences are not important, and the Upanishads agree on their central
ideas: Brahman, the Godhead; Atman, the divine core of personality;
dharma, the law that expresses and maintains the unity of creation; karma,
the web of cause and effect; samsara, the cycle of birth and death; moksha,
the spiritual liberation that is life’s supreme goal.
Even while ancient India was making breakthroughs in the natural
sciences and mathematics, the sages of the Upanishads were turning inward
to analyze the data that nature presents to the mind. Penetrating below the
senses, they found not a world of solid, separate objects but a ceaseless
process of change – matter coming together, dissolving, and coming
together again in a different form. Below this flux of things with “name and
form,” however, they found something changeless: an infinite, indivisible
reality in which the transient data of the world cohere. They called this
reality Brahman: the Godhead, the divine ground of existence.

This analysis of the phenomenal world tallies well enough with
contemporary physics. A physicist would remind us that the things we see
“out there” are not ultimately separate from each other and from us; we
perceive them as separate because of the limitations of our senses. If our
eyes were sensitive to a much finer spectrum, we might see the world as a
continuous field of matter and energy. Nothing in this picture resembles a
solid object in our usual sense of the word. “The external world of physics,”
wrote Sir Arthur Eddington, “has thus become a world of shadows. In
removing our illusions we remove the substance, for indeed we have seen
that substance is one of the greatest of our illusions.” Like the physicists,
these ancient sages were seeking an invariant. They found it in Brahman.
In examining our knowledge of ourselves, the sages made a similar
discovery. Instead of a single coherent personality, they found layer on layer
of components – senses, emotions, will, intellect, ego – each in flux. At
different times and in different company, the same person seems to have
different personalities. Moods shift and flicker, even in those who are
emotionally stable; desires and opinions change with time. Change is the
nature of the mind. The sages observed this flow of thoughts and sensations
and asked, “Then where am I?” The parts do not add up to a whole; they
just flow by. Like physical phenomena, the mind is a field of forces, no
more the seat of intelligence than radiation or gravity is. Just as the world
dissolves into a sea of energy, the mind dissolves into a river of impressions
and thoughts, a flow of fragmentary data that do not hold together.
Western philosophers have reasoned their way to a similar conclusion,
but with them it was an intellectual exercise. David Hume confesses that
whenever he was forced to conclude that his empirical ego was
insubstantial, he went out for a walk, had a good dinner, and forgot all about
it. For these ancient sages, however, these were not logical conclusions but
personal discoveries. They were actually exploring the mind, testing each
level of awareness by withdrawing consciousness to the level below. In
profound meditation, they found, when consciousness is so acutely focused
that it is utterly withdrawn from the body and mind, it enters a kind of
singularity in which the sense of a separate ego disappears. In this state, the
supreme climax of meditation, the seers discovered a core of consciousness
beyond time and change. They called it simply Atman, the Self.
I have described the discovery of Atman and Brahman – God immanent
and God transcendent – as separate, but there is no real distinction. In the

climax of meditation, the sages discovered unity: the same indivisible
reality without and within. It was advaita, “not two.” The Chandogya
Upanishad says epigrammatically, Tat tvam asi: “Thou art That.” Atman is
Brahman: the Self in each person is not different from the Godhead.
Nor is it different from person to person. The Self is one, the same in
every creature. This is not some peculiar tenet of the Hindu scriptures; it is
the testimony of everyone who has undergone these experiments in the
depths of consciousness and followed them through to the end. Here is
Ruysbroeck, a great mystic of medieval Europe; every word is most
carefully chosen:
The image of God is found essentially and personally in all mankind.
Each possesses it whole, entire and undivided, and all together not more
than one alone. In this way we are all one, intimately united in our
eternal image, which is the image of God and the source in us of all our
life.
Maya

In the unitive experience, every trace of separateness disappears; life is a
seamless whole. But the body cannot remain in this state for long. After a
while, awareness of mind and body returns, and then the conventional
world of multiplicity rushes in again with such vigor and vividness that the
memory of unity, though stamped with reality, seems as distant as a dream.
The unitive state has to be entered over and over until a person is
established in it. But once established, even in the midst of ordinary life,
one sees the One underlying the many, the Eternal beneath the ephemeral.
What is it that makes undivided reality appear to be a world of separate,
transient objects? What makes each of us believe that we are the body
rather than our own Self? The sages answered with a story still told after
thousands of years. Imagine, they said, a man dreaming that he is being
attacked by a tiger. His pulse will race, his fists will clench, his forehead
will be wet with the dew of fear – all just as if the attack were real. He will
be able to describe the look of his tiger, the way he smelled, the sound of
his roar. For him the tiger is real, and in a sense he is not wrong: the
evidence he has is not qualitatively different from the kind of evidence we
trust when we are awake. People have even died from the physiological
effects of a potent dream. Only when we wake up can we realize that our

dream-sensations, though real to our nervous system, are a lower level of
reality than the waking state.
The Upanishads delineate three ordinary states of consciousness: waking,
dreaming, and dreamless sleep. Each is real, but each has a higher order of
reality. For beyond these three, the Upanishads say, is the unitive state,
called simply “the fourth”: turiya. Entering this state is similar to waking up
out of dream sleep: the individual passes from a lower level of reality to a
higher one.
The sages called the dream of waking life – the dream of separate,
merely physical existence – by a suggestive name, maya. In general use the
word meant a kind of magic, the power of a god or sorcerer to make a thing
appear to be something else. In the Gita, maya becomes the creative power
of the Godhead, the primal creative energy that makes unity appear as the
world of innumerable separate things with “name and form.”
Later philosophers explained maya in surprisingly contemporary terms.
The mind, they said, observes the so-called outside world and sees its own
structure. It reports that the world consists of a multiplicity of separate
objects in a framework of time, space, and causality because these are the
conditions of perception. In a word, the mind looks at unity and sees
diversity; it looks at what is timeless and reports transience. And in fact the
percepts of its experience are diverse and transient; on this level of
experience, separateness is real. Our mistake is in taking this for ultimate
reality, like the dreamer thinking that nothing is real except his dream.
Nowhere has this “mysterious Eastern notion” been formulated more
succinctly than in the epigram of Ruysbroeck: “We behold what we are, and
we are what we behold.” When we look at unity through the instruments of
the mind, we see diversity; when the mind is transcended, we enter a higher
mode of knowing – turiya, the fourth state of consciousness – in which
duality disappears. This does not mean, however, that the phenomenal
world is an illusion or unreal. The illusion is the sense of separateness.
Here again we can illustrate from physics: the world of “name and form”
exists only as a condition of perception; at the subatomic level, separate
phenomena dissolve into a flux of energy. The effect of maya is similar. The
world of the senses is real, but it must be known for what it is: unity
appearing as multiplicity.
Those who disidentify themselves with the conditions of perception in
maya wake up into a higher mode of knowing in which the unity of life is

apprehended directly. The disciplines for achieving this are called yoga, as
is the state of union: the word comes from the root yuj, to yoke or bind
together. The “experience” itself (properly speaking, it is beyond
experience) is called samadhi. And the state attained is moksha or nirvana,
both of which signify going beyond the conditioning of maya – time, space,
and causality.
In this state we realize that we are not a physical creature but the Atman,
the Self, and thus not separate from God. We see the world not as pieces but
whole, and we see that whole as a manifestation of God. Once identified
with the Self, we know that although the body will die, we will not die; our
awareness of this identity is not ruptured by the death of the physical body.
Thus we have realized the essential immortality which is the birthright of
every human being. To such a person, the Gita says, death is no more
traumatic than taking off an old coat (2:22).
Life cannot offer any higher realization. The supreme goal of human
existence has been attained. The man or woman who realizes God has
everything and lacks nothing: having this, “they desire nothing else, and
cannot be shaken by the heaviest burden of sorrow” (6:22). Life cannot
threaten such a person; all it holds is the opportunity to love, to serve, and
to give.
Dharma, Karma, Rebirth, and Liberation

It has been said that if you understand just two words, dharma and karma,
you will have grasped the essence of Hinduism. This is a simplification, but
it would be difficult to exaggerate the importance of these concepts. Both
are deeply embedded in Hindu thought, and the Gita, like other Hindu
scriptures, takes them for granted, not as theoretical premises but as facts of
life that can be verified in personal experience.
The word dharma means many things, but its underlying sense is “that
which supports,” from the root dhri, to support, hold up, or bear. Generally,
dharma implies support from within: the essence of a thing, its virtue, that
which makes it what it is.
An old story illumines this meaning with the highest ideal of Hinduism.
A sage, seated beside the Ganges, notices a scorpion that has fallen into the
water. He reaches down and rescues it, only to be stung. Some time later he
looks down and sees the scorpion thrashing about in the water again. Once
more he reaches down to rescue it, and once more he is stung. A bystander,

observing all this, exclaims, “Holy one, why do you keep doing that? Don’t
you see that the wretched creature will only sting you in return?” “Of
course,” the sage replied. “It is the dharma of a scorpion to sting. But it is
the dharma of a human being to save.”
On a larger scale, dharma means the essential order of things, an integrity
and harmony in the universe and the affairs of life that cannot be disturbed
without courting chaos. Thus it means rightness, justice, goodness, purpose
rather than chance.
Underlying this idea is the oneness of life: the Upanishadic discovery that
all things are interconnected because at its deepest level creation is
indivisible. This oneness bestows a basic balance on the whole of nature
such that any disturbance in one place has to send ripples everywhere, as a
perfect bubble, touched lightly in one place, trembles all over until balance
is restored. The implications are caught perfectly by those famous lines
from John Donne, which deserve to be read now with a fresh eye as not
merely great rhetoric but a faithful representation of reality:
No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the
continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by the sea,
Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as if a manor
of thy friends or of thine own were; any man’s death diminishes me,
because I am involved in mankind; and therefore never send to know
for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee.
There is an ancient Sanskrit epigram, Ahimsa paramo dharma: the
highest dharma is ahimsa, nonviolence, universal love for all living
creatures; for every kind of violence is a violation of dharma, the
fundamental law of the unity of life.
Thus every act or thought has consequences, which themselves will have
consequences; life is the most intricate web of interconnections. This is the
law of karma, one of the most important and least understood ideas in
ancient Indian thought. Karma is repeated so often in the Gita that I want to
illustrate it in some detail: some intuitive sense of karma as an organic law
makes Krishna’s teachings a good deal clearer.
Literally, the Sanskrit karma means something that is done. Often it can
be translated as deed or action. The law of karma states simply that every
event is both a cause and an effect. Every act has consequences of a similar

kind, which in turn have further consequences and so on; and every act,
every karma, is also the consequence of some previous karma.
This refers not only to physical action but to mental activity as well. In
their analysis of the phenomenal world and the world within, the sages of
the Upanishads found that there is not merely an accidental but an essential
relationship between mental and physical activity. Given appropriate
conditions to develop further, thoughts breed actions of the same kind, as a
seed can grow only into one particular kind of tree.
Baldly put, the law of karma says that whatever you do will come back to
you. No one, of course, has the omniscience to see the picture fully. But the
idea of a network of connections, far from being occult, is natural and
plausible. The law of karma states unequivocally that though we cannot see
the connections, we can be sure that everything that happens to us, good
and bad, originated once in something we did or thought. We ourselves are
responsible for what happens to us, whether or not we can understand how.
It follows that we can change what happens to us by changing ourselves; we
can take our destiny into our own hands.
The physical side of karma, however, only touches the surface of life. To
get an inkling of how karma really works, we have to consider the mind.
Everything we do produces karma in the mind. In fact, it is in the mind
rather than the world that karma’s seeds are planted. Aptly, Indian
philosophy compares a thought to a seed: very tiny, but it can grow into a
huge, deep-rooted, wide-spreading tree. I have seen places where a seed in a
crack of a pavement grew into a tree that tore up the sidewalk. It is difficult
to remove such a tree, and terribly difficult to undo the effects of a lifetime
of negative thinking, which can extend into many other people’s lives. But
it can be done, and the purpose of the Gita is to show how.
Karma is sometimes considered punitive, a matter of getting one’s just
desserts. This is accurate enough, but it is much more illuminating to
consider karma an educative force whose purpose is to teach the individual
to act in harmony with dharma – not to pursue selfish interests at the
expense of others, but to contribute to life and consider the welfare of the
whole. In this sense life is like a school; one can learn, one can graduate,
one can skip a grade or stay behind. As long as a debt of karma remains,
however, a person has to keep coming back for further education. That is
the basis of samsara, the cycle of birth and death.

A good many wrong and misleading words have been written on this
subject, largely because of the fascination it seems to hold in the West.
Rightly understood, however, reincarnation is not exotic but quite natural. If
personality consists of several sheaths, the body being only the outermost,
there is no reason why personality should die when the body is shed. The
sages of the Upanishads saw personality as a field of forces. Packets of
karma to them are forces that have to work themselves out; if the process is
interrupted by death, those forces remain until conditions allow them to
work again in a new context.
Again, sleep can illustrate the dynamics of this idea. In sleep a person
passes in and out of two stages, dreaming and dreamless sleep. In the first,
consciousness is withdrawn from the body and senses but still engaged in
the mind. In dreamless sleep, however, consciousness is withdrawn from
the mind as well. Then the thinking process – even the sense of “I” – is
temporarily suspended, and consciousness is said to rest in the Self. In this
state a person ceases to be a separate creature, a separate personality. In
dreamless sleep, the Upanishads say, a king is not a king nor a pauper poor;
no one is old or young, male or female, educated or ignorant. When
consciousness returns to the mind, however, the thinking process starts up
again, and personality returns to the body.
According to this analysis, the ego dies every night. Every morning we
pick up our desires where we left off: the same person, yet a little different
too. The Upanishads describe dying as a very similar process.
Consciousness is withdrawn from the body into the senses, from the senses
into the mind, and finally consolidated in the ego; when the body is finally
wrenched away, the ego remains, a potent package of desires and karma.
And as our last waking thoughts shape our dreams, the contents of the
unconscious at the time of death – the residue of all that we have thought
and desired and lived for in the past – determine the context of our next life.
We take a body again, the sages say, to come back to just the conditions
where our desires and karma can be fulfilled. The Self-realized person,
however, has no karma to work out, no personal desires; at the time of death
he or she is absorbed into the Lord:
But they for whom I am the supreme goal, who do all work renouncing
self for me and meditate on me with single-hearted devotion, these I

will swiftly rescue from the fragment’s cycle of birth and death, for their
consciousness has entered into me. (12:6–7)
Such a person, the Upanishads stress, can actually shed the body
voluntarily when the hour of death arrives, by withdrawing consciousness
step by step in full awareness. Some of the Gita’s most fascinating verses,
for those who can interpret them, are Krishna’s instructions on how to die
(8:12–13).
YOGA PSYCHOLOGY

In trying to describe their discoveries, the Upanishadic seers developed a
specialized vocabulary. Their terms were later elaborated by mystics who
were also brilliant philosophers – Kapila, Shankara, and others, the ancient
Indian counterparts of authorities like Augustine and Aquinas in the West.
The most useful part of this vocabulary comes from Sankhya, the
philosophical system whose practical counterpart is the school of
meditation called Yoga. Both are traditionally traced to one towering
authority, Kapila, and have much in common with Buddhist philosophy. An
ancient saying celebrates their practicality: “There is no theory like
Sankhya, no practice like Yoga.”
The Gita does not belong to the Sankhya school or to any other; it is as
comprehensive as the Upanishads. But Sankhya provides a precise
vocabulary for describing the workings of the mind, and the Gita draws on
that vocabulary freely.
Sankhya philosophy posits two separate categories: Purusha, spirit, and
prakriti, everything else. This is not the Western mind-matter distinction.
Prakriti is the field of what can be known objectively, the field of
phenomena, the world of whatever has “name and form”: that is, not only of
matter and energy but also of the mind. As physics postulates a unified field
from which all phenomena can be derived, Sankhya describes a field that
includes mental phenomena as well. Mind, energy, and matter all belong to
a field of forces. Purusha, pure spirit, is the knower of this field of
phenomena, and belongs to a wholly different order of reality. Only Purusha
is conscious – or, rather, Purusha is consciousness itself. What we call
“mind” is only an internal instrument that Purusha uses, just as the body is
its external instrument. For practical purposes – at least as far as the Gita is

concerned – Purusha may be regarded as a synonym for Atman. Purusha is
the Self, beyond all change, the same in every creature.
Matter and Mind

Perhaps I should confess at this point that the paragraphs that follow in this
short section are somewhat technical and not necessary for understanding
the Gita. They can be skipped by anyone who finds them dry. I include
them simply because Sankhya’s explanation of mind and matter, when
properly understood, makes sense of many subjects in the Gita that might
otherwise seem arbitrary: maya, the survival of personality after death, the
way karma works through the mind. It accommodates modern physics
perfectly and offers promising explanations of mind-body relationships in
health and disease. However, Sankhya’s way of looking at the mind is very
different from our usual physical orientation, and therefore impossible to
absorb without reflection.
Sankhya’s hallmark is a list (sankhya means counting or listing) of
twenty-four principles or tattvas (“suchnesses”) which trace the steps by
which unitary, primordial prakriti becomes manifested as the countless
forms of mind, matter, and energy that make up the world we live in. The
tattvas are listed in the Gita:
The field, Arjuna, is made up of the following: the five areas of sense
perception; the five elements; the five sense organs and the five organs
of action; the three components of the mind: manas, buddhi, and
ahamkara; and the undifferentiated energy [prakriti] from which all
these evolved. (13:5)
I know of no English words to use for most of these twenty-four
constituents. Manas corresponds roughly to mind the way that word is
commonly used; buddhi is the discriminative faculty, the discriminating
intellect; ahamkara, literally “I-maker,” is the sense of ego. I have used
such rough labels in the translation which follows, but really they are
technical terms with precise definitions, each associated with a specific
function and level of consciousness. Approximations are misleading
because they bring in associations from Western philosophy, which has a
wholly different orientation. Behind all these categories lies a powerful,
practical assumption: Sankhya is not trying to describe physical reality; it is

analyzing consciousness, knowledge, for the sole purpose of unraveling the
human being’s true identity. So it does not begin with the material universe
as something different and separate from the mind that perceives it. It does
not talk about sense objects outside us and senses within and then try to get
the two together. It begins with one world of experience. Sense objects and
senses are not separate; they are two aspects of the same event. Mind,
energy, and matter are a continuum, and the universe is not described as it
might be in itself, but as it presents itself to the human mind. As they say in
the “new physics,” it is not just an observable universe but a participatory
universe.
Let me illustrate. This morning I had a fresh mango for breakfast: a large,
beautiful, fragrant one which had been allowed to ripen until just the right
moment, when the skin was luminous with reds and oranges. You can see
from that kind of description that I like mangoes. I must have eaten
thousands of them when I was growing up, and I probably know most
varieties intimately by their color, shape, flavor, fragrance, and feel.
Sankhya would say that this mango I appreciated so much does not exist
in the world outside – at least, not with the qualities I ascribed to it. The
mango-in-itself, for example, is not red and orange; these are categories of a
nervous system that can deal only with a narrow range of radiant energy.
My dog Bogart would not see a luscious red and orange mango. He would
see some gray mass with no distinguishing features, much less interesting to
him than a piece of buttered toast. But my mind takes in messages from five
senses and fits them into a precise mango-form in consciousness, and that
form – nothing outside – is what I experience. Not that there is no “real”
mango! But what I experience, the objects of my sense perception and my
“knowing,” are in consciousness, nowhere else. A brilliant neuroscientist I
was reading recently says something similar in contemporary language: we
never really encounter the world; all we experience is our own nervous
system.
When the Gita says that the material world is made up of five “material
elements,” then, it is talking about the world as we perceive it through our
five senses. The objects of this world are in the mind, not outside. “Physical
objects” in this sense require a mental component also: five “essences” or
mental conditions of perception, each corresponding to one of the five
senses. From these five tanmatras derive on the one hand the five sense
organs, and on the other hand the five material elements. You can see that

the number five and the correspondences of Sankhya are not arbitrary, but
reflect the ways we have of sorting electrical information supplied to the
brain.
Four of these elements have names similar to those from ancient
philosophy in the West – earth, air, fire, and water. But if we remember that
we are talking about principles of perception rather than “earth-stuff,” “firestuff,” and so on, it should become clear that this is not an antiquated theory
left behind by the progress of physical science. It is quite sophisticated and
accommodates contemporary physical thought rather well, for it recognizes
that in the act of knowing, the mind conditions what is known.
Senses and sense objects, then, are very intimately related. There is a
causal connection, for example, between the things we see and the physical
organ of seeing, the eye and its related branches of the nervous system: both
depend on the underlying form in the mind that conditions how we perceive
light. The objects we see are shaped by the way we see. So senses and sense
objects “make sense” only together: each is incomplete without the other.
That is why there is such a strong pull between senses and sense objects.
On the other hand, the Gita says, this pull has nothing to do with us – the
Self, the knower. When Krishna keeps telling Arjuna to train his mind to be
alike in pleasure and pain, he is simply being practical: to discover unity,
consciousness has to be withdrawn from the hold of the senses, which ties it
to duality.
When the senses contact sense objects, a person experiences cold or
heat, pleasure or pain. These experiences are fleeting; they come and
go. Bear them patiently, Arjuna. Those who are not affected by these
changes, who are the same in pleasure and pain, are truly wise and fit
for immortality. (2:14–15)
The sensory attraction of pleasure is just an interaction between inert
elements of similar stuff, very much like a magnetic pull between two
objects. We are not involved. When I look at a fresh, ripe mango, it is
natural for my senses to respond; that is their nature. But I should be able to
stand aside and watch this interaction with detachment, the way people
stand and watch while movers unload a van. In that way I can enjoy what
my senses report without ever having to act compulsively on their likes and
dislikes.

Sankhya’s explanation of mind and body has profound implications for
psychosomatic medicine. In a system where mental phenomena and
biochemical events take place in the same field, it is much easier to account
for how ways of thinking affect the body. If one idea is central to yoga
psychology, it is that thoughts are real and have real, tangible consequences,
as we saw in the discussion of karma. Sankhya describes thoughts as
packets of potential energy, which grow more and more solid when
favorable conditions are present and obstacles are removed. They become
desires, then habits, then ways of living with physical consequences. Those
consequences may look no more like thoughts than an oak tree looks like an
acorn, but the Gita says they are just as intimately related. Just as a seed can
grow into only one kind of tree, thoughts can produce effects only of the
same nature. Kindness to others, to take just one example, favors a nervous
system that is kind to itself.
The Forces of Evolution

Sankhya describes prakriti as a field of forces called gunas – a concept that
gets a good deal of attention in the Gita.
According to Sankhya, the evolution of primordial prakriti into mind and
matter begins when the equilibrium of prakriti is disturbed. In Hindu myth
this is the dawn of the Day of Brahma (8:17–21), a period of explosive
expansion not unlike the Big Bang of modern cosmology. At this instant of
creation, thrown into imbalance, prakriti differentiates itself into three basic
states or qualities of primordial energy. These are the gunas. Every state of
matter and mind is a combination of these three: tamas, inertia, rajas,
activity, and sattva, harmony or equilibrium. These are only rough
translations, for the gunas have no equivalent in any other philosophy I
know.
The gunas can be illustrated by comparison with the three states of matter
in classical physics: solid, liquid, and gas. Tamas is frozen energy, the
resistance of inertia. A block of ice has a good deal of energy in the
chemical bonds that hold it together, but the energy is locked in, bound up,
rigid. When the ice melts, some of that energy is released as the water
flows; rajas, activity, is like a swollen river, full of uncontrolled power. And
sattva, harmony, can be compared with steam when its power is harnessed.
These are very imprecise parallels, but they convey an important point

about the gunas: all three are states of energy, and each can be converted
into the others.
Guna means strand, and in the Gita the gunas are described as the very
fabric of existence, the veil that hides unity in a covering of diversity.
Tamas is maya’s power of concealment, the darkness or ignorance that
hides unitive reality; rajas distracts and scatters awareness, turning it away
from reality toward the diversity of the outside world. Thus the gunas are
essentially born of the mind. When the mind’s activity is stilled, we see life
as it is.
We can also think of the gunas as different levels of consciousness.
Tamas, the lowest level, is the vast unconscious, a chaotic dumping ground
for the residue of past mental states. “Unconscious” in this sense has
something in common with Jung’s collective unconscious, in that it is the
repository not only of past experiences but also of our evolutionary
heritage, the basic drives of the human being’s animal past. This record is
shared, of course, by all human beings, and at its deepest levels the
unconscious is universal. There is no choice in tamas, no awareness; this is
complete ignorance of the unity of life, ignorance of any other need than
one’s own basic urges.
Rajas is what we ordinarily mean by mind, the incessant stream of
thought that races along, desiring, worrying, resenting, scheming,
competing, frustrating and getting frustrated. Rajas is power released, but
uncontrolled and egocentric.
Sattva, finally, is the so-called higher mind – detached, unruffled, selfcontrolled. This is not a state of repressive regulation, but the natural
harmony that comes with unity of purpose, character, and desire. Negative
states of mind do still come up, prompted by tamas and rajas, but there is no
need to act on them.
According to Sankhya, everything in the world of mind and matter is an
expression of all three gunas, with one guna always predominant. This
becomes particularly interesting in describing personality as a field of
forces. The rajasic person is full of energy; the tamasic person is sluggish,
indifferent, insensitive; the sattvic person, calm, resourceful,
compassionate, and selfless. Yet all three are always present at some level
of awareness, and their proportions change: their interplay is the dynamics
of personality. The same individual will have times when he is bursting
with energy and times when inertia descends and paralyzes his will, times

when he is thoughtful and other times when he is moving so fast that he
never notices those around him. The person is the same; he is simply
experiencing the play of the gunas. As long as he identifies with his body
and mind, he is at the mercy of this play. But the Self is not involved in the
gunas’ interaction; it is witness rather than participant:
Without senses itself, it shines through the functioning of the senses.
Completely independent, it supports all things. Beyond the gunas, it
enjoys their play. (13:14)
The gunas form the basis of the most compassionate account of human
nature I have come across in any philosophy or psychology, East or West.
They not only explain differences in character; they describe the basic
forces of personality and allow the possibility of reshaping ourselves after a
higher ideal. Because personality is a process, the human being is
constantly remaking himself or herself. Left to itself, the mind goes on
repeating the same old habitual patterns of personality. By training the
mind, however, anyone can learn to step in and change old ways of
thinking; that is the central principle of yoga:
Reshape yourself through the power of your will; never let yourself be
degraded by self-will. The will is the only friend of the Self, and the
will is the only enemy of the Self. (6:5)
The Gita speaks of this kind of growth as part of spiritual evolution. In its
natural state, consciousness is a continuous flow of awareness. But through
the distorting action of the gunas, we have fallen from this native state into
fragmented, sometimes stagnant awareness. Seeing through a divided mind,
we see life divided wherever we look: separate selves, antagonistic
interests, conflicts within ourselves. Evolution, according to the Gita, is a
painfully slow return to our native state. First tamas must be transformed
into rajas – apathy and insensitiveness into energetic, enthusiastic activity.
But the energy of rajas is self-centered and dispersed; it must be harnessed
to a higher ideal by the will. Then it becomes sattva, when all this
passionate energy is channeled into selfless action. This state is marked by
happiness, a calm mind, abundant vitality, and the concentration of genius.
But even this is not the end. The goal of evolution is to return to unity:
that is, to still the mind. Then the soul rests in pure, unitary consciousness,

which is a state of permanent joy.
In the still mind, in the depths of meditation, the Self reveals itself.
Beholding the Self by means of the Self, an aspirant knows the joy and
peace of complete fulfillment. (6:20)
THE ESSENCE OF THE GITA

The Gita does not present a system of philosophy. It offers something to
every seeker after God, of whatever temperament, by whatever path. The
reason for this universal appeal is that it is basically practical: it is a
handbook for Self-realization and a guide to action.
Some scholars will find practicality a tall claim, because the Gita is full
of lofty and even abstruse philosophy. Yet even its philosophy is not there
to satisfy intellectual curiosity; it is meant to explain to spiritual aspirants
why they are asked to undergo certain disciplines. Like any handbook, the
Gita makes most sense when it is practiced.
As the traditional chapter titles put it, the Gita is brahmavidyayam
yogashastra, a textbook on the supreme science of yoga. But yoga is a word
with many meanings – as many, perhaps, as there are paths to Selfrealization. What kind of yoga does the Gita teach?
The common answer is that it presents three yogas or even four – the four
main paths of Hindu mysticism. In jnana yoga, the yoga of knowledge,
aspirants use their will and discrimination to disidentify themselves from
the body, mind, and senses until they know they are nothing but the Self.
The followers of bhakti yoga, the yoga of devotion, achieve the same goal
by identifying themselves completely with the Lord in love; by and large,
this is the path taken by most of the mystics of Christianity, Judaism, and
Islam. In karma yoga, the yoga of selfless action, the aspirants dissolve
their identification with body and mind by identifying with the whole of
life, forgetting the finite self in the service of others. And the followers of
raja yoga, the yoga of meditation, discipline the mind and senses until the
mind-process is suspended in a healing stillness and they merge in the Self.
Indians like to classify, and the eighteen chapters of the Gita are said to
break into three six-chapter parts. The first third, according to this, deals
with karma yoga, the second with jnana yoga, and the last with bhakti yoga:
that is, the Gita begins with the way of selfless action, passes into the way
of Self-knowledge, and ends with the way of love. This scheme is not tight,

and non-Hindu readers may find it difficult to discover in the text. But the
themes are there, and Krishna clearly shifts his emphasis as he goes on
using this one word yoga. Here he focuses on transcendental knowledge,
there on selfless action, here on meditation, there on love.
Thus the Gita offers something for every kind of spiritual aspirant, and
for two thousand years each of the major schools of Indian philosophy has
quoted the Gita in defense of its particular claims. This fluidity sometimes
exasperates scholars, who feel the Gita contradicts itself. It also puzzled
Arjuna, the faithful representative of you and me. “Krishna,” he says at the
beginning of chapter 3, “you’ve been telling me that knowledge [jnana] is
better than action [karma]; so why do you urge me into such terrible action?
Your words are inconsistent; they confuse me. Tell me one path to the
highest good” (3:1–2). No doubt he speaks for every reader at this point,
and for those who go on wanting one path only, the confusion simply grows
worse.
For those who try to practice the Gita, however, there is a thread of inner
consistency running through Krishna’s advice. Like a person walking
around the same object, the Gita takes more than one point of view.
Whenever Krishna describes one of the traditional paths to God he looks at
it from the inside, extolling its virtues over the others. For the time being,
that is the path; when he talks about yoga, he means that one particular
yoga. Thus “this ancient word” yoga, says Gandhi’s intimate friend and
secretary, Mahadev Desai,
is pressed by the Gita into service to mean the entire gamut of human
endeavor to storm the gates of heaven. . . . [It means] the yoking of all
the powers of the body and the mind and soul to God; it means the
discipline of the intellect, the mind, the emotions, the will, which such a
yoking presupposes; it means a poise of the soul which enables one to
look at life in all its aspects and evenly.
The Gita brings together all the specialized senses of the word yoga to
emphasize their common meaning: the sum of what one must do to realize
the Self.
The thread through Krishna’s teaching, the essence of the Gita, can be
given in one word: renunciation. This is the common factor in the four
yogas. It is a bleak word in English, conjuring up the austerity and self-

deprivation enjoined on the monastic orders – the “poverty, chastity, and
obedience” so perfectly embodied by Francis of Assisi. When the Gita
promises “freedom through renunciation,” the impression most of us get is
that we are being asked to give up everything we want out of life; in this
drab state, having lost whatever we value, we will be free from sorrow.
Who wants that kind of freedom?
But this is not at all what the Gita means. It does not even enjoin material
renunciation, although it certainly encourages simplicity. As always, its
emphasis is on the mind. It teaches that we can become free by giving up
not material things, but selfish attachments to material things – and, more
important, to people. It asks us to renounce not the enjoyment of life, but
the clinging to selfish enjoyment whatever it may cost others. It pleads, in a
word, for the renunciation of selfishness in thought, word, and action – a
theme that is common to all mystics, West and East alike.
Mahatma Gandhi encapsulates the Gita’s message in one phrase:
nishkama karma, selfless action, work free from any selfish motives. In this
special sense, whatever path the Gita is presenting at a given time, it
remains essentially a manual of karma yoga, for it is addressed to the
person who wants to realize God without giving up an active life in the
world. In the Gita the four traditional yogas are not watertight
compartments, and in practice, all of them blend and support each other on
the path to Self-realization.
Nishkama karma means literally work that is without kama, that is,
without selfish desire. This word kama – indeed the whole idea of desire in
Hindu and Buddhist psychology – is frequently misunderstood. These
religions, it is sometimes held, teach an ideal of desireless action, a nirvana
equated with the extinction of all desires. This drab view is far from the
truth. Desire is the fuel of life; without desire nothing can be achieved, let
alone so stupendous a feat as Self-realization. Kama is not desire; it is
selfish desire. The Buddha calls it tanha,“ thirst”: the fierce, compulsive
craving for personal satisfaction that demands to be slaked at any cost,
whether to oneself or to others. Thus the concept also includes what
Western mystics call self-will – the naked ego insisting on getting what it
wants for its own gratification. The Gita teaches simply that this selfish
craving is what makes a person feel separate from the rest of life. When it is
extinguished – the literal meaning of nirvana – the mask of the transient,
petty empirical ego falls, revealing our real Self.

Work hard in the world without any selfish attachment, the Gita counsels,
and you will purify your consciousness of self-will. In this way any man or
woman can gradually attain freedom from the bondage of selfish
conditioning.
This is a mental discipline, not just a physical one, and I want to repeat
that to understand the Gita, it is important to look beneath the surface of its
injunctions and see the mental state involved. Nishkama karma is not “good
works” or philanthropic activity; work can benefit others and still carry a
substantial measure of ego involvement. Such work is good, but it is not
yoga. It may benefit others, but it will not necessarily benefit the doer.
Everything depends on the state of mind. Action without selfish motive
purifies the mind: the doer is less likely to be ego-driven later. The same
action done with a selfish motive entangles a person further, precisely by
strengthening that motive so it is more likely to prompt selfish action again.
In the Gita this is said in many ways, and from differences in language it
may seem that Krishna is giving different pieces of advice. In practice,
however, it becomes evident that these are only various ways of saying the
same thing.
To begin with, Krishna often tells Arjuna to “renounce the fruits of
action” (karma-phala):
You have the right to work, but never to the fruit of work. You should
never engage in action for the sake of reward, nor should you long for
inaction. Perform work in this world, Arjuna, as a man established
within himself – without selfish attachments, and alike in success and
defeat. For yoga is perfect evenness of mind. (2:47–48)
“Fruits,” of course, means the outcome. What Krishna means is to give
up attachment to the results of what you do: that is, to give your best to
every undertaking without insisting that the results work out the way you
want, or even whether what you do is pleasant or unpleasant. “You have the
right to action, but not to the fruits of action”: each of us has the obligation
to act rightly, but no power to dictate what is to come of what we do.
Mahatma Gandhi explains with the authority of his personal experience:
By detachment I mean that you must not worry whether the desired
result follows from your action or not, so long as your motive is pure,

your means correct. Really, it means that things will come right in the
end if you take care of the means and leave the rest to Him.
“But renunciation of fruit,” Gandhi warns,
in no way means indifference to the result. In regard to every action one
must know the result that is expected to follow, the means thereto, and
the capacity for it. He who, being thus equipped, is without desire for
the result and is yet wholly engrossed in the due fulfillment of the task
before him, is said to have renounced the fruits of his action.
This attitude frees us completely. Whatever comes – success or failure,
praise or blame, victory or defeat – we can give our best with a clear,
unruffled mind. Nothing can shake our courage or break our will; no
setback can depress us or make us feel “burned out.” Clearly, as the Gita
says, “Yoga is skill in action” (2:50).
Only the person who is utterly detached and utterly dedicated, Gandhi
says, is free to enjoy life. Asked to sum up his life “in twenty-five words or
less,” he replied, “I can do it in three!” and quoted the Isha Upanishad:
“Renounce and enjoy.” Those who are compulsively attached to the results
of action cannot really enjoy what they do; they get downcast when things
do not work out and cling more desperately when they do. So the Gita
classifies the karma of attachment as pleasant at first, but “bitter as poison
in the end” (18:38), because of the painful bondage of conditioning.
Again, Krishna repeatedly tells Arjuna to surrender everything to him in
love. But this is not different advice, merely different words. Krishna is
asking Arjuna to act entirely for His sake, not for any personal gain. The
whole point of the path of love is to transform motivation from “I, I, I” to
“thou, thou, thou” – that is, to surrender selfish attachments by dissolving
them in the desire to give.
Krishna puts this most beautifully in the famous verses of Chapter 9
which begin, “Whatever you do, make it an offering to me” (9:27). Do it,
that is, not for personal reward but out of love for the Lord, present in every
creature. “Whatever you eat, whatever worship you perform, whatever you
give, whatever you suffer”: everything is to be done and given and endured
and enjoyed for the sake of the Lord in all, not for ourselves. Manmana:
this is the refrain of the Gita. Krishna tells Arjuna repeatedly, “Fill your

mind with me, focus every thought on me, think of me always”; then “you
will be united with me” (see 9:34). The same injunction was given to Moses
and reiterated by Jesus and Mohammed. In practical terms, it means that
awareness will be integrated down to the deepest recesses of the
unconscious, which is precisely the significance of the word yoga.
Meister Eckhart says eloquently of this state:
Whoever has God in mind, simply and solely God, in all things, such a
man carries God with him into all his works and into all places, and God
alone does all his works. He seeks nothing but God; nothing seems good
to him but God. He becomes one with God in every thought. Just as no
multiplicity can dissipate God, so nothing can dissipate this man or
make him multiple.
Thus we arrive at the idea of “actionless action”: of persons so
established in identification with the Self that in the midst of tireless service
of those around them, they remain in inner peace, the still witness of action.
They do not act, the Gita says; it is the Self that acts through them: “They
alone see truly who see that all actions are performed by prakriti, while the
Self remains unmoved” (13:29). Again, this is a universal testimony. Here
is one of the most active of mystics, St. Catherine of Genoa:
When the soul is naughted and transformed, then of herself she neither
works nor speaks nor wills, nor feels nor hears nor understands; neither
has she of herself the feeling of outward or inward, where she may
move. And in all things it is God who rules and guides her, without the
mediation of any creature. And the state of this soul is then a feeling of
such utter peace and tranquility that it seems to her that her heart, and
her bodily being, and all both within and without, is immersed in an
ocean of utmost peace. . . . And she is so full of peace that though she
press her flesh, her nerves, her bones, no other thing comes forth from
them than peace.
Again, when the Gita talks about “inaction in the midst of action” (4:18,
etc.), we can call on Ruysbroeck to illumine the seeming paradox. The
person who has realized God, he says, mirrors both His aspects: “tranquility
according to His essence, activity according to His nature: absolute repose,
absolute fecundity.” And he adds,

The interior person lives his life according to these two ways; that is to
say, in rest and in work. And in each of them he is wholly and
undividedly; for he dwells wholly in God in virtue of his restful fruition
and wholly in himself in virtue of his active love. . . . This is the
supreme summit of the inner life.
This is the only kind of inaction the Gita recommends. It is action of the
most tireless kind; the only thing inactive is the ego. To live without the
daily sacrifice (yajna) of selfless service – to work just for oneself, or
worse, to do nothing at all – is simply to be a thief (3:12). It is not possible
to do nothing, Krishna says; the very nature of the mind is incessant
activity. The Gita’s goal is to harness this activity in selfless service,
removing the poisonous agency of the ego: “As long as one has a body, one
cannot renounce action altogether. True renunciation is giving up all desire
for personal reward” (18:11). Meister Eckhart explains,
To be right, a person must do one of two things: either he must learn to
have God in his work and hold fast to him there, or he must give up his
work altogether. Since, however, man cannot live without activities that
are both human and various, we must learn to keep God in everything
we do, and whatever the job or place, keep on with him, letting nothing
stand in our way.
It would be difficult to find a better summary of the Gita’s message
anywhere – and this, incidentally, from someone considered to represent the
path of knowledge.
Krishna wraps all this up in one famous verse: “Abandon all supports and
look to me for protection. I shall purify you from the sins of the past; do not
grieve” (18:66). Krishna is the Self; the words mean simply to cast aside
external props and dependencies and rely on the Self alone, seeking
strength nowhere but within.
Why does selfless action lead to Self-realization? It is not a matter of
“good” action being divinely rewarded. Self-realization is not some kind of
compensation for good deeds. We can understand the dynamics if we
remember that the Gita’s emphasis is on the mind. Most human activity,
good and bad, is tainted by ego-involvement. Such activity cannot purify
consciousness, because it goes on generating new karma in the mind – in

practical terms, we go on getting entangled in what we do. Selfless work
purifies consciousness because when there is no trace of ego involvement,
new karma is not produced; the mind is simply working out the karma it has
already accumulated.
Shankara illustrates this with the simile of a potter’s wheel. The ego’s job
is to go on incessantly spinning the wheel of the mind and making karmapots: new ideas to act on, fresh desires to pursue. When this pointless
activity stops, no more pots are made, but for a while the wheel of the mind
goes on spinning out of the momentum of its past karma. This is an
anguishing period in the life of every mystic: you have done everything you
can; now you can only wait with a kind of impatient patience. Eventually,
for no reason that one can understand, the wheel does come to a stop,
dissolving the mind-process in samadhi.
A HIGHER IMAGE

Perhaps the clearest way to grasp the Gita is to look at the way it describes
those who embody its teachings. There are portraits like this at the
beginning of the Gita, the middle, and the end, each offering a model of our
full human potential.
The first is given at the end of chapter 2 (2:54–72), verses which Gandhi
said hold the key to the entire Gita. Arjuna has just been told about Selfknowledge; now he asks a very practical question: when a person attains
this knowledge, how does it show? How do such people conduct
themselves in everyday life? We expect a list of virtues. Instead, Krishna
delivers a surprise: the surest sign is that they have banished all selfish
desires. Their senses and mind are completely trained, so they are free from
sensory cravings and self-will. Identified completely with the Self, not with
body or mind, they realize their immortality here on earth.
The implications of this are not spelled out; we have to see them in a
living person. G. K. Chesterton once said that to understand the Sermon on
the Mount, we should look not at Christ but at St. Francis. To understand
the Gita I went to look at Mahatma Gandhi, who had done his best for forty
years to translate those verses into his daily life. Seeing him, I understood
that those “who see themselves in all and all in them” would simply not be
capable of harming others. Augustine says daringly, “Love, then do as you
like”: nothing will come out of you but goodness. I saw too what it meant to
view one’s body with detachment: not indifference, but compassionate care

as an instrument of service. I saw what it means to rest in the midst of
intense action. Most important, I grasped one of the most refreshing ideas in
Hindu mysticism: original goodness. Since the Self is the core of every
personality, no one needs to acquire goodness or compassion; they are
already there. All that is necessary is to remove the selfish habits that hide
them.
Chapter 12 gives another portrait in its closing verses (12:13–20), and
here we do get an inspiring list of the marks of those who follow the path of
love:
That one I love who is incapable of ill will, who is friendly and
compassionate. Living beyond the reach of I and mine and of pleasure
and pain, patient, contented, self-controlled, firm in faith, with all their
heart and all their mind given to me – with such as these I am in love.
(12:13–14)
And finally comes the passionate description with which the Gita ends,
when Krishna tells Arjuna how to recognize the man or woman who has
reached life’s supreme goal:
One who is free from selfish attachments, who has mastered himself
and his passions, attains the supreme perfection of freedom from action.
Listen and I shall explain now, Arjuna, how one who has attained
perfection also attains Brahman, the supreme consummation of wisdom.
(18:49–50)
These are not separate paths, separate ideals. All three passages describe
one person: vital, active, compassionate, self-reliant in the highest sense, for
he looks to the Self for everything and needs nothing from life but the
opportunity to give. In brief, such a person knows who he is, and in that
knowing is everything.
This is not running away from life, as is so often claimed. It is running
into life, open-handed, open-armed: “flying, running, and rejoicing,” says
Thomas à Kempis, for “he is free and will not be bound,” never entangled
in self-doubts, conflict, or vacillation. Far from being desireless – look at
Gandhi, St. Catherine of Siena, St. Teresa, St. Francis – the man or woman
who realizes God has yoked all human passions to the overriding desire to
give and love and serve; and in that unification we can see, not the

extinction of personality, but its full blossoming. This is what it means to be
fully human; our ordinary lives of stimulus and response, getting and
spending, seem by comparison as faint as remembered dreams. This
flowering of the spirit appeals, I think, to everyone. “This is the true joy in
life,” says Bernard Shaw:
the being used for a purpose recognized by yourself as a mighty one; . .
. the being a force of Nature instead of a feverish selfish little clod of
ailments and grievances complaining that the world will not devote
itself to making you happy.
Instead of “Nature” with a capital N, of course, the Gita would say “an
instrument of the Self”; but that is the only difference. One of the most
appealing features of the Gita for our times is that it clears up
misunderstandings about the spiritual life and shows it for what it is: active,
joyful, intentional, a middle path between extremes that transfigures
everyday living.
FAITH AND SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION

One last untranslatable concept and I will let the Gita speak for itself. That
concept is shraddha, and its nearest English equivalent is faith. I have
translated it as such, but shraddha means much more. It is literally “that
which is placed in the heart”: all the beliefs we hold so deeply that we never
think to question them. It is the set of values, axioms, prejudices, and
prepossessions that colors our perceptions, governs our thinking, dictates
our responses, and shapes our lives, generally without our even being aware
of its presence and power.
This may sound philosophical, but shraddha is not an intellectual
abstraction. It is our very substance. The Gita says, “A person is what his
shraddha is” (17:3). The Bible uses almost the same words: “As a man
thinketh in his heart, so is he.” Shraddha reflects everything that we have
made ourselves and points to what we have become. But there is nothing
passive about shraddha. It is full of potency, for it prompts action,
conditions behavior, and determines how we see and therefore respond to
the world around us.
When Norman Cousins talks about a “belief system” analogous to the
body’s organ systems, that is one aspect of shraddha; he is referring to the

power to heal or harm that is inherent in our ideas of ourselves. One person
with a serious illness believes he has a contribution to make to the world
and so he recovers; another believes his life is worthless and he dies: that is
the power of shraddha. Similarly, self-image is part of shraddha. One
person believes she will succeed in life and overcomes great obstacles;
another, who believes she can do nothing, may be more gifted and face
fewer difficulties but accomplish very little.
Yet shraddha is not brute determination or wishful thinking. When St.
John of the Cross says “We live in what we love,” he is explaining
shraddha. This is our world. Our lives are an eloquent expression of our
belief: what we deem worth having, doing, attaining, being. What we strive
for shows what we value; we back our shraddha with our time, our energy,
our very lives.
Thus shraddha determines destiny. As the Buddha puts it, “All that we
are is the result of what we have thought. We are made of our thoughts; we
are molded by our thoughts.” As we think, so we become. This is true not
only of individuals but of societies, institutions, and civilizations, according
to the dominant ideas that shape their actions. Faith in technology, for
example, is part of the shraddha of modern civilization.
“Right shraddha,” according to the Gita, is faith in spiritual laws: in the
unity of life, the presence of divinity in every person, the essentially
spiritual nature of the human being. “Wrong shraddha” is not necessarily
morally wrong, merely ignorant. It means believing that there is no more to
life than physical existence, that the human being is only a biochemical
entity, that happiness can be got by pursuing private interests and ignoring
the rest of life. Such beliefs are misplaced: we have attached our shraddha
to beliefs that life cannot bear out. Sooner or later they must prove false,
and then our shraddha changes. Like our thinking, therefore – like we
ourselves – shraddha evolves. The purpose of karma is to teach the
consequences of shraddha, so that by trial and error, life after life, the
individual soul acquires the kind of faith that leads to fulfillment of life’s
supreme goal. Krishna explains the dynamics:
When a person is devoted to something with complete faith, I unify his
faith in that. Then, when faith is completely unified, one gains the
object of devotion. In this way, every desire is fulfilled by me. (7:21–
22)

This is perhaps the most compassionate insight into human evolution
ever expressed. The Gita is steeped in it, but it is not exclusive to the Gita
or to Hinduism. “Whether you like it or not, whether you know it or not,”
says Meister Eckhart, “secretly Nature seeks and hunts and tries to ferret
out the track in which God may be found.” The whole purpose of every
experience, every activity, every faculty, is to turn the human being inward
and lead each of us back to our divine source. Thus every person seeking
satisfaction in the world outside – pleasure, power, profit, prestige – is
really looking for God: “As they approach me, so I receive them. All paths,
Arjuna, lead to me” (4:11).
Two forces pervade human life, the Gita says: the upward thrust of
evolution and the downward pull of our evolutionary past. Ultimately, then,
the Gita is not a book of commandments but a book of choices. It does
mention sin, but mostly it talks about ignorance and its consequences.
Krishna tells Arjuna about the Self, the forces of the mind, the relationship
between thought and action, the law of karma, and then concludes, “Now,
Arjuna, reflect on these words and then do as you choose” (18:63). The
struggle is between two halves of human nature, and choices are posed
every moment. Everyone who has accepted this challenge, I think, will
testify that life offers no fiercer battle than this war within. We have no
choice about the fighting; it is built into human nature. But we do have the
choice of which side to fight on:
Remembering me, you shall overcome all difficulties through my grace.
But if you will not heed me in your self-will, nothing will avail you. If
you egotistically say, “I will not fight this battle,” your resolve will be
useless; your own nature will drive you into it. (18:58–59)
Therefore, remember me at all times and fight on. With your heart and
mind intent on me, you will surely come to me. (8:7)
Thus the Gita places human destiny entirely in human hands. Its world is
not deterministic, but neither is it an expression of blind chance: we shape
ourselves and our world by what we believe and think and act on, whether
for good or for ill. In this sense the Gita opens not on Kurukshetra but on
dharmakshetra, the field of dharma, where Arjuna and Krishna are standing
for us all.

Chapter One

The War Within
Sri Krishna consoles and instructs Prince Arjuna as he is about to go into
battle against family and friends to defend his older brother’s claim to the
ancient throne of the Kurus. Thus the great scripture called Bhagavad Gita,
the “Song of the Lord,” begins. Sri Krishna is Bhagavan, “the Lord,” the
mysterious incarnation of Lord Vishnu, the aspect of God who fosters and
preserves the universe against the forces constantly working to destroy and
corrupt it. Krishna has appeared on earth as a royal prince of the house of
the Yadavas; thus he combines earthly majesty with a hidden spiritual
power. Most know him only as an unimportant prince, but the wise have
seen him reveal his power to destroy evil and protect the good.
The battle of the Bhagavad Gita is not Krishna’s fight, however; it is
Arjuna’s. Krishna is only Arjuna’s charioteer and advisor. He has promised
Arjuna that he will be with him throughout the ordeal, but much as he
passionately hopes for Arjuna’s victory, he has sworn to be a noncombatant
in the struggle. A charioteer’s position is a lowly one compared to the status
and glory of the warrior he drives, but Krishna assumes this modest role out
of love for Arjuna. As charioteer, he is in a perfect position to give advice
and encouragement to Arjuna without violating his promise not to join the
fight himself.
To secure their claim to the throne, Arjuna and his brothers must fight not
an alien army but their own cousins, who have held the kingdom for many
years. Tragically, the forces against them include their own uncle, the blind
king Dhritarashtra, and even the revered teachers and elders who guided
Arjuna and his brothers when they were young. Arjuna, of course, wants to
win the throne for his brother, who is the rightful heir to the Kuru dynasty
and has endured many wrongs. But he is dismayed at the prospect of
fighting his own people. Thus, on the morning the great battle is to begin,
he turns to Krishna, his friend and spiritual advisor, and asks him the deeper
questions about life that he has never asked before. The Bhagavad Gita is
Krishna’s answer.
Other warriors who appear elsewhere in the drama are mentioned in this
first chapter of the Gita. To Indians these are familiar figures from the

legendary past, but to most Western readers they will be unknown and even
unpronounceable names. Arjuna and his brothers are known as the
Pandavas, “the sons of Pandu”: Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Sahadeva,
and Nakula. The other side is called the Kauravas, “the sons of Kuru.” This
is somewhat misleading, for both sides of the royal family are Kurus by
birth. But the Pandavas are now in the position of appearing to be the
dissident faction, so they are called “sons of Pandu” to distinguish them
from the larger family.
Pandu was once king of the kingdom of Hastinapura, but he retired into
the forest on spiritual retreat and died young. His elder brother,
Dhritarashtra, was blind since birth, so he was never named ruler, but he did
share power with his brother. When Pandu died his eldest son, Yudhishthira,
should have succeeded him; but because Yudhishthira was only a boy,
Dhritarashtra continued on after Pandu’s death.
As time passed, however, Dhritarashtra’s attachment to his own eldest
son, Duryodhana, gradually overcame him. Instead of rising to royal
impartiality and allowing Yudhishthira his fair claim, the old, blind king
began to connive at his son’s demand to succeed to the throne. Actually, the
line of succession had grown convoluted over several generations, and it
was not unthinkable that Duryodhana should rule next. But Yudhishthira’s
outstanding qualities and Duryodhana’s corruption gradually decided the
issue, at least from the moral point of view. For Duryodhana, the conflict
could be resolved only on the battlefield.
Other warriors are mentioned briefly in chapter 1. Two particularly
important figures in the Mahabharata story are Drona and Bhishma. Drona
was born a brahmin, a member of the priestly caste, but in search of wealth
he took up the way of the warrior and excelled in the knowledge of arms.
He was the teacher, the guru, of all the royal princes in their youth, the sons
of Pandu and the sons of Dhritarashtra alike. Thus it was he who taught
both sides the skills of war – an irony which sharp-tongued Duryodhana
points out in verse 3. Arjuna was Drona’s best pupil when it came to the
bow, excelling even Drona’s own son, Ashvatthama.
Bhishma, “the grandsire” of both sides, is not actually the princes’
grandfather but a respected elder statesman. As Dhritarashtra’s advisor of
many years’ standing, he considers it his duty to stand by his king and try to
protect him from his weaknesses and wrong decisions.

Another figure introduced in chapter 1 is Sanjaya, who narrates the entire
Gita to the blind king Dhritarashtra. Sanjaya is not present on the
battlefield, but the text tells us that the sage Vyasa, the composer of the
Gita, has given him divine sight so that he can see and report everything.
Chapter 1 leaves us acutely aware that we are on a battlefield, waiting for
a catastrophic war to begin; but once Krishna begins his instruction, we
leave the battlefield behind and enter the realms of philosophy and mystical
vision. The first chapter is but a bridge to the real subjects of the Gita, and
thus need not detain us too long in our study of the poem.
Yet the first chapter has caused a great deal of debate, largely because of
what it has to say about the morality of war. Basically there have been two
points of view, which are almost (but perhaps not completely)
irreconcilable. First, there is the orthodox Hindu viewpoint that the Gita
condones war for the warrior class: it is the dharma, the moral duty, of
soldiers to fight in a good cause, though never for evil leaders. (It should be
added that this is part of an elaborate and highly chivalrous code
prescribing the just rules of war.) According to this orthodox view, the
lesson of the Mahabharata (and therefore of the Gita) is that although war
is evil, it is an evil that cannot be avoided – an evil both tragic and
honorable for the warrior himself. War in a just cause, justly waged, is also
in accord with the divine will. Because of this, in the Mahabharata,
Yudhishthira and his noble brothers find their peace in the next world when
they have finished their duty on earth.
The mystics’ point of view is more subtle. For them the battle is an
allegory, a cosmic struggle between good and evil. Krishna has revealed
himself on earth to reestablish righteousness, and he is asking Arjuna to
engage in a spiritual struggle, not a worldly one. According to this
interpretation, Arjuna is asked to fight not his kith and kin but his own
lower self. Mahatma Gandhi, who based his daily life on the Gita from his
twenties on, felt it would be impossible to live the kind of life taught in the
Gita and still engage in violence. To argue that the Gita condones violence,
he said, was to give importance only to its opening verses – its preface, so
to speak – and ignore the scripture itself.
For some, it helps clarify this question to look upon the Gita as an
Upanishad, a mystical statement from the Vedas, that was incorporated into
the warrior epic of a later age. Chapter 1 of the Gita then forms a rather

perilous bridge between the warrior’s world and the essential part of the
Gita – Sri Krishna’s revelations of spiritual truth. –D.M.

1: The War Within
DHRITARASHTRA
1 O Sanjaya, tell me what happened at Kurukshetra, the field of

dharma, where my family and the Pandavas gathered to fight.
SANJAYA
2 Having surveyed the forces of the Pandavas arrayed for battle,

prince Duryodhana approached his teacher, Drona, and spoke. 3 “O
my teacher, look at this mighty army of the Pandavas, assembled by
your own gifted disciple, Yudhishthira. 4 There are heroic warriors
and great archers who are the equals of Bhima and Arjuna:
Yuyudhana, Virata, the mighty Drupada, 5 Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana,
the valiant king of Kashi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja,the great leader
Shaibya, 6 the powerful Yudhamanyu, the valiant Uttamaujas, and
the son of Subhadra, in addition to the sons of Draupadi. All these
command mighty chariots.
7 “O best of brahmins, listen to the names of those who are

distinguished among our own forces: 8 Bhishma, Karna, and the
victorious Kripa; Ashvatthama, Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta.
9 “There are many others, too, heroes giving up their lives for my

sake, all proficient in war and armed with a variety of weapons. 10
Our army is unlimited and commanded by Bhishma; theirs is small
and commanded by Bhima. 11 Let everyone take his proper place
and stand firm supporting Bhishma!”
12 Then the powerful Bhishma, the grandsire, oldest of all the

Kurus, in order to cheer Duryodhana, roared like a lion and blew his

conch horn. 13 And after Bhishma, a tremendous noise arose of
conchs and cow horns and pounding on drums.
14 Then Sri Krishna and Arjuna, who were standing in a mighty

chariot yoked with white horses, blew their divine conchs. 15 Sri
Krishna blew the conch named Panchajanya, and Arjuna blew that
called Devadatta. The mighty Bhima blew the huge conch Paundra.
16 Yudhishthira, the king, the son of Kunti, blew the conch
Anantavijaya; Nakula and Sahadeva blew their conchs as well. 17
Then the king of Kashi, the leading bowman, the great warrior
Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, the invincible Satyaki, 18
Drupada, all the sons of Draupadi, and the strong-armed son of
Subhadra joined in, 19 and the noise tore through the heart of
Duryodhana’s army. Indeed, the sound was tumultuous, echoing
throughout heaven and earth.
20 Then, O Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, having seen your son’s

forces set in their places and the fighting about to begin, Arjuna
spoke these words to Sri Krishna:
ARJUNA
21 O Krishna, drive my chariot between the two armies. 22 I want to

see those who desire to fight with me. With whom will this battle be
fought? 23 I want to see those assembled to fight for Duryodhana,
those who seek to please the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra by
engaging in war.
SANJAYA
24 Thus Arjuna spoke, and Sri Krishna, driving his splendid chariot

between the two armies, 25 facing Bhishma and Drona and all the
kings of the earth, said: “Arjuna, behold all the Kurus gathered
together.”
26 And Arjuna, standing between the two armies, saw fathers and

grandfathers, teachers, uncles, and brothers, sons and grandsons, 27
in-laws and friends. Seeing his kinsmen established in opposition, 28
Arjuna was overcome by sorrow. Despairing, he spoke these words:

ARJUNA

O Krishna, I see my own relations here anxious to fight, 29 and my
limbs grow weak; my mouth is dry, my body shakes, and my hair is
standing on end. 30 My skin burns, and the bow Gandiva has slipped
from my hand. I am unable to stand; my mind seems to be whirling.
31 These signs bode evil for us. I do not see that any good can come
from killing our relations in battle. 32 O Krishna, I have no desire
for victory, or for a kingdom or pleasures. Of what use is a kingdom
or pleasure or even life, 33 if those for whose sake we desire these
things – 34 teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, uncles, in-laws,
grandsons, and others with family ties – are engaging in this battle,
renouncing their wealth and their lives? 35 Even if they were to kill
me, I would not want to kill them, not even to become ruler of the
three worlds. How much less for the earth alone?
36 O Krishna, what satisfaction could we find in killing

Dhritarashtra’s sons? We would become sinners by slaying these
men, even though they are evil. 37 The sons of Dhritarashtra are
related to us; therefore, we should not kill them. How can we gain
happiness by killing members of our own family?
38 Though they are overpowered by greed and see no evil in

destroying families or injuring friends, we see these evils. 39 Why
shouldn’t we turn away from this sin? 40 When a family declines,
ancient traditions are destroyed. With them are lost the spiritual
foundations for life, and the family loses its sense of unity. 41 Where
there is no sense of unity, the women of the family become corrupt;
and with the corruption of its women, society is plunged into chaos.
42 Social chaos is hell for the family and for those who have
destroyed the family as well. It disrupts the process of spiritual
evolution begun by our ancestors. 43 The timeless spiritual
foundations of family and society would be destroyed by these
terrible deeds, which violate the unity of life.
44 It is said that those whose family dharma has been destroyed

dwell in hell. 45 This is a great sin! We are prepared to kill our own
relations out of greed for the pleasures of a kingdom. 46 Better for

me if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons in hand, were to attack me
in battle and kill me unarmed and unresisting.
SANJAYA
47 Overwhelmed by sorrow, Arjuna spoke these words. And casting

away his bow and his arrows, he sat down in his chariot in the
middle of the battlefield.

Chapter Two

Self-Realization
As Arjuna’s spiritual teacher, Sri Krishna’s task now is to rouse Arjuna
from his despair and set him on the way to Self-realization.
Arjuna is essentially a man of action, renowned for his bravery, nobility,
and skill in the arts of war – intelligent, but not given to reflection. Yet in
his present crisis, he finds that the active life is not enough. He is forced to
ask the perennial questions about life and death: Does he have a soul? Does
it survive death? Is there a deeper reality than we perceive in the world
around us? If so, is it possible to know it directly, and (for Arjuna is always
practical) what effect does such knowing have in everyday life?
In his answer, Krishna touches on almost all the main themes and
concepts of the Gita. Chapter 2 is thus a kind of overview of the sixteen
chapters to come.
Sri Krishna begins by reminding Arjuna of his immortal nature: his real
Self, the Atman, never dies, for it is never born; it is eternal. Thus the Gita
does not lead us from stage to stage of spiritual awareness, but begins with
the ultimate premise: the immortal soul is more important than the passing
world.
Knowing he is out of his depth in these inner realms of the mind and
spirit, Arjuna formally asks Krishna to be his spiritual teacher or guru. This
is a basic prerequisite of a disciple’s initiation in the Hindu tradition, where
it is believed that virtually all seekers need the guidance of an experienced
teacher. Arjuna is no exception, and he is fortunate to have Krishna himself
as his guru. In the allegorical sense, Krishna is a symbol of the Atman,
Arjuna’s deepest Self.
This chapter introduces the idea of rebirth or samsara. The Self wears the
body as a garment; when the garment is old, it is cast aside and a new one is
put on. Thus the soul, or jiva, travels from life to life. Just as death is certain
for the living, rebirth is certain for the dead. Krishna assures Arjuna that his
basic nature is not subject to time and death; yet he reminds him that he
cannot realize this truth if he cannot see beyond the dualities of life:
pleasure and pain, success and failure, even heat and cold. The Gita does
not teach a spirituality aimed at an enjoyable life in the hereafter, nor does it

teach a way to enhance power in this life or the next. It teaches a basic
detachment from pleasure and pain, as this chapter says more than once.
Only in this way can an individual rise above the conditioning of life’s
dualities and identify with the Atman, the immortal Self.
Also, the Gita does not teach an enlightenment based on a knowledge of
the scriptures. The important thing is direct mystical experience, which
Krishna will later urge Arjuna to acquire for himself.
This chapter establishes the various definitions of yoga taught in the Gita.
Here the word does not refer to the physical postures and exercises (hatha
yoga) it connotes in the West; it refers primarily to disciplining the mind.
“Yoga is evenness of mind”: detachment from the dualities of pain and
pleasure, success and failure. Therefore “yoga is skill in action,” because
this kind of detachment is required if one is to act in freedom, rather than
merely react to events compelled by conditioning. Krishna is not trying to
persuade Arjuna to lead a different kind of life and renounce the world as
would a monk or recluse. He tells Arjuna that if he can establish himself in
yoga – in unshakable equanimity, profound peace of mind – he will be more
effective in the realm of action. His judgment will be better and his vision
clear if he is not emotionally entangled in the outcome of what he does.
Arjuna now asks his first question as Krishna’s student. His teacher has
been talking about spiritual wisdom: direct, experiential knowledge of the
immortal Self. Arjuna wants to know what difference this kind of wisdom
makes in everyday life. If a person establishes an ever-present awareness of
the core of divinity within himself, how does it affect the way he lives?
Arjuna is not interested in what people believe, but in how they conduct
themselves in life.
Krishna’s answer (2:55 –72 ) is one of the most quoted passages in the
Gita. Mahatma Gandhi said these verses contain the essence of the Gita: if
the rest of the scripture were lost, this passage alone would be enough to
teach a complete way of life. Those who are established in wisdom (sthitaprajna) live in continuous, unbroken awareness that they are not the
perishable body but the Atman. Further, they see the same Self in everyone,
for the Atman is universally present in all.
Such a one, Krishna says, does not identify with personal desires. These
desires are on the surface of personality, and the Self is its very core. The
Self-realized man or woman is not motivated by personal desires – in other
words, by any desire for kama, personal satisfaction. This idea is perhaps

foreign to modern ways of thinking, but basic to the Gita – and, indeed, to
mystics of all traditions.
More specifically, the word kama refers to any gratification of the ego or
the senses that entangles us in the world of samsara, and thus draws us
away from the core of our being, the Self. Those established in Selfrealization control their senses instead of letting their senses control them.
If the senses are not controlled, Krishna warns, the mind (or emotions) will
follow wherever they lead. Eventually a person following the senses loses
strength of will and unity of purpose; his choices are dictated by his desires.
When the will is led astray by the desire for pleasure, the mind becomes
confused and scattered. Ultimately, Krishna warns, this leads to spiritual
destruction:
When you keep thinking about sense objects, attachment comes.
Attachment breeds desire, the lust of possession that burns to anger.
Anger clouds the judgment; you can no longer learn from past mistakes.
Lost is the power to choose between what is wise and what is unwise,
and your life is utter waste. (2:62 –63 )
Yet the Gita does not recommend asceticism. It is more a matter of
training the body, mind, and senses.
At the very close of the chapter, Krishna introduces the idea that it is not
enough to master all selfish desires; it is also necessary to subdue
possessiveness and egocentricity. If this ultimate bourne can be passed, then
the seeker will know the true, immortal Self within. This is the mystics’
supreme goal: knowing their real nature, they know their own immortality
and realize their union with eternal Being. –D.M.

2: Self-Realization
SANJAYA
1 These are the words that Sri Krishna spoke to the despairing

Arjuna, whose eyes were burning with tears of pity and confusion.
KRISHNA
2 This despair and weakness in a time of crisis are mean and

unworthy of you, Arjuna. How have you fallen into a state so far
from the path to liberation? 3 It does not become you to yield to this
weakness. Arise with a brave heart and destroy the enemy.
ARJUNA
4 How can I ever bring myself to fight against Bhishma and Drona,

who are worthy of reverence? How can I, Krishna? 5 Surely it
would be better to spend my life begging than to kill these great and
worthy souls! If I killed them, every pleasure I found would be
tainted. 6 I don’t even know which would be better, for us to
conquer them or for them to conquer us. The sons of Dhritarashtra
have confronted us; but why would we care to live if we killed
them?
7 My will is paralyzed, and I am utterly confused. Tell me which is

the better path for me. Let me be your disciple. I have fallen at your
feet; give me instruction. 8 What can overcome a sorrow that saps
all my vitality? Even power over men and gods or the wealth of an
empire seem empty.
SANJAYA

9 This is how Arjuna, the great warrior, spoke to Sri Krishna. With

the words, “O Krishna, I will not fight,” he fell silent. 10 As they
stood between the two armies, Sri Krishna smiled and replied to
Arjuna, who had sunk into despair.
KRISHNA
11 You speak sincerely, but your sorrow has no cause. The wise

grieve neither for the living nor for the dead. 12 There has never
been a time when you and I and the kings gathered here have not
existed, nor will there be a time when we will cease to exist. 13 As
the same person inhabits the body through childhood, youth, and old
age, so too at the time of death he attains another body. The wise are
not deluded by these changes.
14 When the senses contact sense objects, a person experiences cold

or heat, pleasure or pain. These experiences are fleeting; they come
and go. Bear them patiently, Arjuna. 15 Those who are unaffected by
these changes, who are the same in pleasure and pain, are truly wise
and fit for immortality. Assert your strength and realize this!
16 The impermanent has no reality; reality lies in the eternal. Those

who have seen the boundary between these two have attained the
end of all knowledge. 17 Realize that which pervades the universe
and is indestructible; no power can affect this unchanging,
imperishable reality. 18 The body is mortal, but that which dwells in
the body is immortal and immeasurable. Therefore, Arjuna, fight in
this battle.
19 One believes he is the slayer, another believes he is the slain.

Both are ignorant; there is neither slayer nor slain. 20 You were
never born; you will never die. You have never changed; you can
never change. Unborn, eternal, immutable, immemorial, you do not
die when the body dies. 21 Realizing that which is indestructible,
eternal, unborn, and unchanging, how can you slay or cause another
to slay?

22 As one abandons worn-out clothes and acquires new ones, so

when the body is worn out a new one is acquired by the Self, who
lives within.
23 The Self cannot be pierced by weapons or burned by fire; water

cannot wet it, nor can the wind dry it. 24 The Self cannot be pierced
or burned, made wet or dry. It is everlasting and infinite, standing on
the motionless foundations of eternity. 25 The Self is unmanifested,
beyond all thought, beyond all change. Knowing this, you should
not grieve.
26 O mighty Arjuna, even if you believe the Self to be subject to

birth and death, you should not grieve. 27 Death is inevitable for the
living; birth is inevitable for the dead. Since these are unavoidable,
you should not sorrow. 28 Every creature is unmanifested at first and
then attains manifestation. When its end has come, it once again
becomes unmanifested. What is there to lament in this?
29 The glory of the Self is beheld by a few, and a few describe it; a

few listen, but many without understanding. 30 The Self of all
beings, living within the body, is eternal and cannot be harmed.
Therefore, do not grieve.
31 Considering your dharma, you should not vacillate. For a warrior,

nothing is higher than a war against evil. 32 The warrior confronted
with such a war should be pleased, Arjuna, for it comes as an open
gate to heaven. 33 But if you do not participate in this battle against
evil, you will incur sin, violating your dharma and your honor.
34 The story of your dishonor will be repeated endlessly: and for a

man of honor, dishonor is worse than death. 35 These brave warriors
will think you have withdrawn from battle out of fear, and those
who formerly esteemed you will treat you with disrespect. 36 Your
enemies will ridicule your strength and say things that should not be
said. What could be more painful than this?
37 Death means the attainment of heaven; victory means the

enjoyment of the earth. Therefore rise up, Arjuna, resolved to fight!

38 Having made yourself alike in pain and pleasure, profit and loss,

victory and defeat, engage in this great battle and you will be freed
from sin.
39 You have heard the intellectual explanation of Sankhya, Arjuna;

now listen to the principles of yoga. By practicing these you can
break through the bonds of karma. 40 On this path effort never goes
to waste, and there is no failure. Even a little effort toward spiritual
awareness will protect you from the greatest fear.
41 Those who follow this path, resolving deep within themselves to

seek me alone, attain singleness of purpose. For those who lack
resolution, the decisions of life are many-branched and endless.
42 There are ignorant people who speak flowery words and take

delight in the letter of the law, saying that there is nothing else. 43
Their hearts are full of selfish desires, Arjuna. Their idea of heaven
is their own enjoyment, and the aim of all their activities is pleasure
and power. The fruit of their actions is continual rebirth. 44 Those
whose minds are swept away by the pursuit of pleasure and power
are incapable of following the supreme goal and will not attain
samadhi.
45 The scriptures describe the three gunas. But you should be free

from the action of the gunas, established in eternal truth, selfcontrolled, without any sense of duality or the desire to acquire and
hoard.
46 Just as a reservoir is of little use when the whole countryside is

flooded, scriptures are of little use to the illumined man or woman,
who sees the Lord everywhere.
47 You have the right to work, but never to the fruit of work. You

should never engage in action for the sake of reward, nor should you
long for inaction. 48 Perform work in this world, Arjuna, as a man
established within himself – without selfish attachments, and alike
in success and defeat. For yoga is perfect evenness of mind.

49 Seek refuge in the attitude of detachment and you will amass the

wealth of spiritual awareness. Those who are motivated only by
desire for the fruits of action are miserable, for they are constantly
anxious about the results of what they do. 50 When consciousness is
unified, however, all vain anxiety is left behind. There is no cause
for worry, whether things go well or ill. Therefore, devote yourself
to the disciplines of yoga, for yoga is skill in action.
51 The wise unify their consciousness and abandon attachment to the

fruits of action, which binds a person to continual rebirth. Thus they
attain a state beyond all evil.
52 When your mind has overcome the confusion of duality, you will

attain the state of holy indifference to things you hear and things
you have heard. 53 When you are unmoved by the confusion of
ideas and your mind is completely united in deep samadhi, you will
attain the state of perfect yoga.
ARJUNA
54 Tell me of those who live established in wisdom, ever aware of

the Self, O Krishna. How do they talk? How sit? How move about?
KRISHNA
55 They live in wisdom who see themselves in all and all in them,

who have renounced every selfish desire and sense craving
tormenting the heart.
56 Neither agitated by grief nor hankering after pleasure, they live

free from lust and fear and anger. Established in meditation, they are
truly wise. 57 Fettered no more by selfish attachments, they are
neither elated by good fortune nor depressed by bad. Such are the
seers.
58 Even as a tortoise draws in its limbs, the wise can draw in their

senses at will. 59 Aspirants abstain from sense pleasures, but they
still crave for them. These cravings all disappear when they see the
highest goal. 60 Even of those who tread the path, the stormy senses

can sweep off the mind. 61 They live in wisdom who subdue their
senses and keep their minds ever absorbed in me.
62 When you keep thinking about sense objects, attachment comes.

Attachment breeds desire, the lust of possession that burns to anger.
63 Anger clouds the judgment; you can no longer learn from past
mistakes. Lost is the power to choose between what is wise and
what is unwise, and your life is utter waste. 64 But when you move
amidst the world of sense, free from attachment and aversion alike,
65 there comes the peace in which all sorrows end, and you live in
the wisdom of the Self.
66 The disunited mind is far from wise; how can it meditate? How

be at peace? When you know no peace, how can you know joy? 67
When you let your mind follow the call of the senses, they carry
away your better judgment as storms drive a boat off its charted
course on the sea.
68 Use all your power to free the senses from attachment and

aversion alike, and live in the full wisdom of the Self. 69 Such a sage
awakes to light in the night of all creatures. That which the world
calls day is the night of ignorance to the wise.
70 As rivers flow into the ocean but cannot make the vast ocean

overflow, so flow the streams of the sense-world into the sea of
peace that is the sage. But this is not so with the desirer of desires.
71 They are forever free who renounce all selfish desires and break

away from the ego-cage of “I,” “me,” and “mine” to be united with
the Lord. 72 This is the supreme state. Attain to this, and pass from
death to immortality.

Chapter Three

Selfless Service
The title of this chapter in Sanskrit is Karma Yoga, “The Way of Action,”
and here we take an apparently sharp turn away from the subject of the
previous chapter. In fact, Arjuna changes the subject completely. Krishna
has been trying to convince him that he has an immortal soul, but Arjuna
continues to worry about his immediate predicament. It is not that he is
uninterested in mystical enlightenment, but his main concern at the moment
is just what he is supposed to do next.
Or, he asks, perhaps what he does is not so important after all. Has
Krishna been telling him to concentrate on acquiring spiritual wisdom and
to forget about his apparent duties in the world?
Krishna replies that there is no way Arjuna can avoid the obligation of
selfless action, or karma yoga. Arjuna must act selflessly, out of a sense of
duty. He must work not for his own sake, but for the welfare of all. Krishna
points out that this is a basic law underlying all creation. Each being must
do its part in the grand scheme of things, and there is no way to avoid this
obligation – except perhaps by the complete enlightenment which loosens
all the old bonds of karma.
Here the Gita refers to the doctrine of karma, one of the basic teachings
in all Hindu and Buddhist scriptures. Karma literally means deed or action;
what is sometimes called the “law of karma” refers to an underlying law of
cause and effect that is seen to permeate all existence. The idea is that every
action leads to a reasonable result – and, consequently, that everything that
happens can be traced to something done in the past. Actions determine
destiny: this is the basic idea of karma. If anything happens to us that is
truly good, we must have done something in the past to deserve it; if
something ill befalls us, then at some time in the past we did something that
was not so meritorious. This is a basic moral law that all great spiritual
traditions share: the belief that we reap what we sow.
The Hindu tradition gave a great deal of thought to this problem of moral
cause and effect, and generation after generation of spiritual teachers
fathomed its depths and implications. One fear that developed over time
was that all action was in a sense an open door to bondage: anything a

person did would bind him to the endless cycle of cause and effect. Some
“fruits” of action would of course be pleasant – not all karma is painful. But
even this pleasure could be a trap, because we would seek it compulsively,
tying ourselves tighter and tighter to the responsibilities and opportunities
of the worldly life and forgetting our spiritual dimension altogether.
In chapter 3 Krishna begins to tell Arjuna the way out of this maze of
cause and effect. It is not to avoid work, especially the duties required by
his station in life, but to perform those duties without selfish attachment to
their “fruit,” or outcome. If Arjuna follows this path of selfless work,
Krishna explains, he will enjoy this world as well as the next. More
important, he will gain a spiritual blessing and will be lessening his debt of
karma. Only when he is free from every bond of karma – every
consequence of past action – can he achieve life’s ultimate goal.
The world is bound in its own activity, for all creatures except the
illumined man or woman work for their own pleasure and gain. Because
they act selfishly, they are bound by the results, whether good or bad. We
must act in a selfless spirit, Krishna says, without ego-involvement and
without getting entangled in whether things work out the way we want;
only then will we not fall into the terrible net of karma. We cannot hope to
escape karma by refraining from our duties: even to survive in the world,
we must act.
True, the Hindu scriptures do hold out another path – jnana yoga, the
path of wisdom – which does not enjoin action. But Krishna does not really
offer this to Arjuna as an alternative; it is acknowledged and then dropped.
Perhaps Krishna knows that Arjuna is not the type to disengage himself and
go off on a search for the mystical vision. For Arjuna, the active life is
essential.
The danger, of course, of a life of active engagement in the world is that
Arjuna will get caught up in his actions and begin to act out of selfish
motives. If this were to happen, he would be doomed to spiritual failure.
Having a good deal of self-knowledge, Arjuna senses this danger. He
asks Krishna a fundamental question: What power binds us to our selfish
ways? Even if we wish to act rightly, so often we do the wrong thing. What
power moves us?
Krishna replies that anger and selfish desire are our greatest enemies.
They are the destructive powers that can compel us to wander away from
our purpose, to end up in self-delusion and despair.

Here it is necessary to introduce two technical terms from Hindu
philosophy. The Gita is not an academic work of philosophy, but a poetic,
practical text. Still, it does refer from time to time to Sankhya, one of the
six traditional schools of Indian philosophy. In Sankhya, the phenomenal
world of mind and matter is described as having three basic qualities or
gunas: sattva– goodness, light, purity; rajas– passion, activity, energy; and
tamas– darkness, ignorance, inertia. According to Sankhya, spiritual
evolution progresses from tamas to rajas to sattva, and final liberation takes
the soul beyond the three gunas altogether.
Here Krishna warns Arjuna to beware the pitfalls of rajas, for it is from
rajas that anger and selfish desire arise. Arjuna must realize that his true
nature, the Atman, is above entanglement in the gunas. The gunas act and
react upon one another, but Arjuna’s inner being is not affected. If he cannot
reach this detachment, he will be always caught in the emotional storms of
passion (rajas) or the quagmires of inertia (tamas) which alternate in
dominating the mind and body.
Krishna offers Arjuna the example of King Janaka, well known from
holy legend, as a model for the princely estate. Janaka was a king who ruled
well and did not shirk his responsibilities, yet he was detached and worked
from a sense of duty, not for personal gain or enjoyment. He was revered as
a royal sage who pursued his enlightenment not by renouncing the world,
but by working in it and contributing to its welfare, thus enjoying the best
of both worlds. –D.M.

3: Selfless Service
ARJUNA
1 O Krishna, you have said that knowledge is greater than action;

why then do you ask me to wage this terrible war? 2 Your advice
seems inconsistent. Give me one path to follow to the supreme
good.
KRISHNA
3 At the beginning of time I declared two paths for the pure heart:

jnana yoga, the contemplative path of spiritual wisdom, and karma
yoga, the active path of selfless service.
4 One who shirks action does not attain freedom; no one can gain

perfection by abstaining from work. 5 Indeed, there is no one who
rests for even an instant; all creatures are driven to action by their
own nature.
6 Those who abstain from action while allowing the mind to dwell

on sensual pleasure cannot be called sincere spiritual aspirants. 7
But they excel who control their senses through the mind, using
them for selfless service.
8 Fulfill all your duties; action is better than inaction. Even to

maintain your body, Arjuna, you are obliged to act. 9 Selfish action
imprisons the world. Act selflessly, without any thought of personal
profit.
10 At the beginning, mankind and the obligation of selfless service

were created together. “Through selfless service, you will always be

fruitful and find the fulfillment of your desires”: this is the promise
of the Creator.
11 Honor and cherish the devas as they honor and cherish you;

through this honor and love you will attain the supreme good. 12 All
human desires are fulfilled by the devas, who are pleased by selfless
service. But anyone who enjoys the things given by the devas
without offering selfless acts in return is a thief.
13 The spiritually minded, who eat in the spirit of service, are freed

from all their sins; but the selfish, who prepare food for their own
satisfaction, eat sin. 14 Living creatures are nourished by food, and
food is nourished by rain; rain itself is the water of life, which
comes from selfless worship and service.
15 Every selfless act, Arjuna, is born from Brahman, the eternal,

infinite Godhead. Brahman is present in every act of service. 16 All
life turns on this law, O Arjuna. Those who violate it, indulging the
senses for their own pleasure and ignoring the needs of others, have
wasted their life. 17 But those who realize the Self are always
satisfied. Having found the source of joy and fulfillment, they no
longer seek happiness from the external world. 18 They have
nothing to gain or lose by any action; neither people nor things can
affect their security.
19 Strive constantly to serve the welfare of the world; by devotion to

selfless work one attains the supreme goal of life. 20 Do your work
with the welfare of others always in mind. It was by such work that
Janaka attained perfection; others too have followed this path.
21 What the outstanding person does, others will try to do. The

standards such people create will be followed by the whole world. 22
There is nothing in the three worlds for me to gain, Arjuna, nor is
there anything I do not have; I continue to act, but I am not driven
by any need of my own. 23 If I ever refrained from continuous work,
everyone would immediately follow my example. 24 If I stopped
working I would be the cause of cosmic chaos, and finally of the
destruction of this world and these people.

25 The ignorant work for their own profit, Arjuna; the wise work for

the welfare of the world, without thought for themselves. 26 By
abstaining from work you will confuse the ignorant, who are
engrossed in their actions. Perform all work carefully, guided by
compassion.
27 All actions are performed by the gunas of prakriti. Deluded by

identification with the ego, a person thinks, “I am the doer.” 28 But
the illumined man or woman understands the domain of the gunas
and is not attached. Such people know that the gunas interact with
each other; they do not claim to be the doer.
29 Those who are deluded by the operation of the gunas become

attached to the results of their action. Those who understand these
truths should not unsettle the ignorant. 30 Performing all actions for
my sake, completely absorbed in the Self, and without expectations,
fight! – but stay free from the fever of the ego.
31 Those who live in accordance with these divine laws without

complaining, firmly established in faith, are released from karma. 32
Those who violate these laws, criticizing and complaining, are
utterly deluded, and are the cause of their own suffering.
33 Even the wise act within the limitations of their own nature.

Every creature is subject to prakriti; what is the use of repression? 34
The senses have been conditioned by attraction to the pleasant and
aversion to the unpleasant. Do not be ruled by them; they are
obstacles in your path.
35 It is better to strive in one’s own dharma than to succeed in the

dharma of another. Nothing is ever lost in following one’s own
dharma, but competition in another’s dharma breeds fear and
insecurity.
ARJUNA
36 What is the force that binds us to selfish deeds, O Krishna? What

power moves us, even against our will, as if forcing us?

KRISHNA
37 It is selfish desire and anger, arising from the guna of rajas; these

are the appetites and evils which threaten a person in this life.
38 Just as a fire is covered by smoke and a mirror is obscured by

dust, just as the embryo rests deep within the womb, knowledge is
hidden by selfish desire – 39 hidden, Arjuna, by this unquenchable
fire for self-satisfaction, the inveterate enemy of the wise.
40 Selfish desire is found in the senses, mind, and intellect,

misleading them and burying the understanding in delusion. 41 Fight
with all your strength, Arjuna! Controlling your senses, conquer
your enemy, the destroyer of knowledge and realization.
42 The senses are higher than the body, the mind higher than the

senses; above the mind is the intellect, and above the intellect is the
Atman. 43 Thus, knowing that which is supreme, let the Atman rule
the ego. Use your mighty arms to slay the fierce enemy that is
selfish desire.

Chapter Four

Wisdom in Action
Krishna is eager to grant Arjuna knowledge of the highest spiritual truths,
or even a rare mystical vision; but Arjuna has been asking for Krishna to
simply get him out of his present difficulties. Of course these difficulties are
not minor – he is caught in a family tragedy that has developed into a
vicious conflict. If he cannot extricate himself, he knows that he will have
to take part in a catastrophic battle that no one wants.
So when Krishna begins to tell Arjuna about the “secret teachings” he
will be privileged to hear because he is Krishna’s favorite devotee and
friend, it hardly registers in Arjuna’s consciousness. His reply is confused.
“How could you have taught any secret wisdom to the sages of old?” he
asks.
At this point Krishna reminds Arjuna again of the process of rebirth.
They have both been reborn many times, but naturally Arjuna does not
remember his past lives because he has no access to this kind of knowledge.
Krishna remembers his former births, but he is no ordinary being. He
reveals that he has chosen to take on human birth many times for the
welfare of the world. Whenever dharma, the law of life’s unity, declines, he
wraps himself in his maya and takes on a finite form. Thus he returns age
after age.
Vishnu, the preserving or sustaining person of the Hindu Trinity, is not
mentioned here, but Krishna is usually looked upon as an incarnation of this
aspect of God. As the Lord, Krishna explains, he dwells in every being, but
he is manifested with special power in his incarnations or avatars. Avatara
literally means descent: Vishnu is believed to descend and incarnate himself
on earth from age to age to reestablish divine law (dharma). Without such
intervention the entire created universe would go into decline. The natural
course of creation is to go through cycles of regeneration and decay, but
Vishnu – Krishna – has compassion for all the suffering of the world, and
comes himself to protect the good and destroy evil. Thus Vishnu has a
special relationship with all beings: he personifies the aspect of God who so
loves the world that he comes into it to reestablish the purity and happiness
of the Golden Age.

Krishna here reveals a little of his hidden, divine nature. He tells Arjuna
that mystical union with him is possible through devotion, by which one
can enter the state of divine love in which one sees God in every creature.
Krishna also takes on the role of creator. It is he who has patterned the
world along the lines of guna and karma.
This mystic aspect of Krishna’s being dominates the Gita. In the
Mahabharata, Krishna is a princely ally who is wise and daring in his
support of his friend Arjuna. But the author of the Gita is not concerned
with this Krishna; he turns his attention to the mystery of Krishna’s divine
nature as an aspect of Vishnu. In this sense Krishna is the inner Self in all
beings. His name comes from the Sanskrit root krish, “to draw to oneself, to
attract.” He is the “attractive one,” the “Lord of loving attraction.” By
another etymology, the word Krishna means “the dark one.” The author of
the Gita sees revealed in him the ultimate Godhead, the supreme being. But
this reality is often veiled, and then Krishna is seen as an ordinary human
being – or, rather, as an exceptionally gifted man, but not as God.
Many of Krishna’s words make most sense when we realize that when he
speaks of himself, he is often not describing a transcendental reality so
much as trying to tell Arjuna about the Self in every human being. When he
says, for example, “Actions do not cling to me because I am not attached to
their results,” he means, “Arjuna, actions do not cling to your real Self.”
The Self in us is not touched by action; whatever we do, it remains
unsullied. “Those who understand this” – about themselves – “and practice
it live in freedom.”
The latter part of this chapter turns from lofty mystical topics back to
Arjuna’s immediate problem. Krishna begins to talk about action, and work,
and things that should be done and should not be done. It is essential, he
reminds Arjuna, to act wisely, with detachment. The wise never act with
selfish attachment to the fruit of their labor; they give their best in fortune
and misfortune alike. Such people act in freedom.
The next section deals with the various kinds of yajna – worship or
offering – that may be performed by spiritual aspirants of differing
temperaments. Hindu rituals often involve making an offering to the gods
by pouring an oblation into the sacred fire. Here the image is the same:
whatever is offered is symbolically thrown into a consuming fire that
carries the offering to God. The offering may be as obvious as worldly
goods, or as subtle as knowledge or meditation: in any case it requires a

measure of self-sacrifice. Yajna is a basic action, necessary to life, and those
who do not perform some kind of selfless service find no home in this
world or the next.
The final verses of chapter 4 introduce a new principle. In the last
chapter, Krishna mentioned the path of spiritual wisdom as an alternative to
the path of action or karma yoga. Now he reveals that wisdom is the goal of
selfless action: knowing is the fruit of doing. The goal of all karma yoga or
yajna is liberation and spiritual wisdom. The fire of spiritual awareness
burns to ashes even a great heap of karma; thus true knowledge is the
greatest purifier of the soul.
Krishna ends by exhorting Arjuna to cut through the doubts that still
stifle him. This is the first – but not the last – mention that Krishna makes
of Arjuna’s doubting heart. There has been no indication so far that Arjuna
has taken in and accepted Krishna’s words. But even though Arjuna
continues to drag his feet, Krishna does not abandon him. –D.M.

4: Wisdom in Action
KRISHNA
1 I told this eternal secret to Vivasvat. Vivasvat taught Manu, and

Manu taught Ikshvaku. 2 Thus, Arjuna, eminent sages received
knowledge of yoga in a continuous tradition. But through time the
practice of yoga was lost in the world.
3 The secret of these teachings is profound. I have explained them to

you today because you are my friend and devotee.
ARJUNA
4 You were born much after Vivasvat; he lived very long ago. Why

do you say that you taught this yoga in the beginning?
KRISHNA
5 You and I have passed through many births, Arjuna. You have

forgotten, but I remember them all.
6 My true being is unborn and changeless. I am the Lord who dwells

in every creature. Through the power of my own maya, I manifest
myself in a finite form.
7 Whenever dharma declines and the purpose of life is forgotten, I

manifest myself on earth. 8 I am born in every age to protect the
good, to destroy evil, and to reestablish dharma.
9 Those who know me as their own divine Self break through the

belief that they are the body and are not reborn as separate creatures.
Such a one, Arjuna, is united with me. 10 Delivered from selfish

attachment, fear, and anger, filled with me, surrendering themselves
to me, purified in the fire of my being, many have reached the state
of unity in me.
11 As they approach me, so I receive them. All paths, Arjuna, lead to

me.
12 Those desiring success in their actions worship the gods; through

action in the world of mortals, their desires are quickly fulfilled. 13
The distinctions of caste, guna, and karma have come from me. I am
their cause, but I myself am changeless and beyond all action. 14
Actions do not cling to me because I am not attached to their results.
Those who understand this and practice it live in freedom. 15
Knowing this truth, aspirants desiring liberation in ancient times
engaged in action. You too can do the same, pursuing an active life
in the manner of those ancient sages.
16 What is action and what is inaction? This question has confused

the greatest sages. I will give you the secret of action, with which
you can free yourself from bondage. 17 The true nature of action is
difficult to grasp. You must understand what is action and what is
inaction, and what kind of action should be avoided.
18 The wise see that there is action in the midst of inaction and

inaction in the midst of action. Their consciousness is unified, and
every act is done with complete awareness.
19 The awakened sages call a person wise when all his undertakings

are free from anxiety about results; all his selfish desires have been
consumed in the fire of knowledge. 20 The wise, ever satisfied, have
abandoned all external supports. Their security is unaffected by the
results of their action; even while acting, they really do nothing at
all. 21 Free from expectations and from all sense of possession, with
mind and body firmly controlled by the Self, they do not incur sin
by the performance of physical action.
22 They live in freedom who have gone beyond the dualities of life.

Competing with no one, they are alike in success and failure and

content with whatever comes to them. 23 They are free, without
selfish attachments; their minds are fixed in knowledge. They
perform all work in the spirit of service, and their karma is
dissolved.
24 The process of offering is Brahman; that which is offered is

Brahman. Brahman offers the sacrifice in the fire of Brahman.
Brahman is attained by those who see Brahman in every action.
25 Some aspirants offer material sacrifices to the gods. Others offer

selfless service as sacrifice in the fire of Brahman. 26 Some
renounce all enjoyment of the senses, sacrificing them in the fire of
sense restraint. Others partake of sense objects but offer them in
service through the fire of the senses. 27 Some offer the workings of
the senses and the vital forces through the fire of self-control,
kindled in the path of knowledge.
28 Some offer wealth; others offer sense restraint and suffering.

Some take vows and offer knowledge and study of the scriptures;
and some make the offering of meditation. 29 Some offer the forces
of vitality, regulating their inhalation and exhalation, and thus gain
control over these forces. 30 Others offer the forces of vitality
through restraint of their senses. All these understand the meaning
of service and will be cleansed of their impurities.
31 True sustenance is in service, and through it a man or woman

reaches the eternal Brahman. But those who do not seek to serve are
without a home in this world. Arjuna, how can they be at home in
any world to come?
32 These offerings are born of work, and each guides mankind along

a path to Brahman. Understanding this, you will attain liberation. 33
The offering of wisdom is better than any material offering, Arjuna;
for the goal of all work is spiritual wisdom.
34 Approach those who have realized the purpose of life and

question them with reverence and devotion; they will instruct you in

this wisdom. 35 Once you attain it, you will never again be deluded.
You will see all creatures in the Self, and all in me.
36 Even if you were the most sinful of sinners, Arjuna, you could

cross beyond all sin by the raft of spiritual wisdom. 37 As the heat of
a fire reduces wood to ashes, the fire of knowledge burns to ashes
all karma. 38 Nothing in this world purifies like spiritual wisdom. It
is the perfection achieved in time through the path of yoga, the path
which leads to the Self within.
39 Those who take wisdom as their highest goal, whose faith is deep

and whose senses are trained, attain wisdom quickly and enter into
perfect peace. 40 But the ignorant, indecisive and lacking in faith,
waste their lives. They can never be happy in this world or any
other.
41 Those established in the Self have renounced selfish attachments

to their actions and cut through doubts with spiritual wisdom. They
act in freedom. 42 Arjuna, cut through this doubt in your own heart
with the sword of spiritual wisdom. Arise; take up the path of yoga!

Chapter Five

Renounce & Rejoice
At the beginning of this chapter, the traditional approach to the spiritual life
– that is, “leaving the world,” retiring from the ordinary affairs of job and
family – is contrasted with working in the world with detachment. The
general term for retiring from the world is sannyasa, “renunciation.”
Traditionally, sannyasa meant renouncing all worldly ties and attachments.
The person undertaking the vow of sannyasa would leave home, family, and
occupation to pursue a strict contemplative life.
This was a path chosen by very few, even in ancient India. Yet we
shouldn’t forget that surprising numbers of people in traditional societies,
both in the East and the West, have chosen a monastic life removed from
the turmoil of the world. In India, the Compassionate Buddha provides the
classic example of one who leaves the comforts and fulfillments of family
and worldly life to seek the lonely way to Self-realization. The story is well
known throughout Asia. Siddhartha Gautama was a prince with every
worldly satisfaction within his reach, who left his palace to find a way to
lead the world beyond suffering and death. He became a wandering
sannyasi, a lonely, austere monk. Only after he had attained to complete
enlightenment did he return to society, to teach others of the peace of
nirvana.
Though Krishna acknowledges here that this way of sannyasa can lead to
the goal, he recommends the path of selfless action or selfless service as the
better way. He contrasts the way of Sankhya – which in this context means
knowledge of the Self in a general way – to the way of yoga, which here
means the way of action. This term yoga presents difficulties in the Gita
because it means different things at different times, and many definitions
are given of this all-purpose term. But for several chapters the topic under
discussion has been the active spiritual life, or karma yoga, and that is
clearly what is meant in this context. Sankhya and yoga might also be
translated as “theory and practice.”
It would seem that at the time of the Gita the path of wisdom was
regarded very highly, while the path of action may have been looked upon
as an adulteration of the spiritual life. It is even possible that the Gita was

the first Hindu scripture to introduce the novel idea of combining karma
yoga with the pursuit of Self-knowledge. Krishna says that only immature,
inexperienced people look upon the paths of knowledge and action as
different. The true goal of action is knowledge of the Self. Following either
path faithfully will lead to the complete spiritual vision.
It is essential in karma yoga that the selfish ego not expect gratification
from the work. When there is no selfish involvement in work, the worker
does not come to spiritual harm. The example is the lotus: it spends its life
floating in water, yet the drops of water roll off its leaves without ever
wetting them. Similarly, as long as the karma yogis do not expect reward or
recognition, any evil that might stain them has nowhere to cling. Such yogis
are said to be detached from the outcome or fruits of their actions (karma
phala).
Krishna warns Arjuna that a life of work, even successful work, cannot
be fulfilling without Self-knowledge. Ultimately, the true Self within him is
not affected by what he does, whether good or bad. Only knowledge of the
Self, which rises like the sun at dawn, can fulfill the purpose of his life and
lead him beyond rebirth.
This knowledge of the Self or Atman is, by its very nature, also
knowledge of Brahman, the all-pervading, immanent and transcendent
Godhead. Krishna says that the illumined person sees this divine essence in
all beings. He or she has “equal vision” and sees the divine Self in all,
regardless of the outer aspect.
The last three verses of the chapter describe a state of profound
meditation called samadhi. When meditation becomes very deep, breathing
becomes slow, steady, and even, and the windows of the senses close to all
outward sensations. Next the faculties of the mind quiet down, resting from
their usually frantic activity; even the primal emotions of desire, fear, and
anger subside. When all these sensory and emotional tides have ceased to
flow, then the spirit is free, mukta – at least for the time being. It has entered
the state called samadhi.
Samadhi can come and go; generally it can be entered only in a long
period of meditation and after many years of ardent endeavor. But one verse
(5:28) adds the significant word sada, “always.” Once this state of deep
concentration becomes established, the person lives in spiritual freedom, or
moksha, permanently. This is extremely rare. Mystics of the West as well as
the East have attained brief glimpses of unity, but very few can be said to

have dwelt in it permanently, as if it were their natural habitat. In the West
the most prominent figures are Meister Eckhart, St. Teresa of Avila, and St.
John of the Cross, though there have been others. In the Hindu tradition
there is a long line of saints and mystics who have tried to communicate
something of the nature of this union with Reality or God, from the
unknown recorders of the Upanishads through the Buddha, Shankara, and
Meera, to Ramakrishna and Ramana Maharshi. –D.M.

5: Renounce & Rejoice
ARJUNA
1 O Krishna, you have recommended both the path of selfless action

and sannyasa, the path of renunciation of action. Tell me definitely
which is better.
KRISHNA
2 Both renunciation of action and the selfless performance of action

lead to the supreme goal. But the path of action is better than
renunciation.
3 Those who have attained perfect renunciation are free from any

sense of duality; they are unaffected by likes and dislikes, Arjuna,
and are free from the bondage of self-will. 4 The immature think
that knowledge and action are different, but the wise see them as the
same. The person who is established in one path will attain the
rewards of both. 5 The goal of knowledge and the goal of service are
the same; those who fail to see this are blind.
6 Perfect renunciation is difficult to attain without performing

action. But the wise, following the path of selfless service, quickly
reach Brahman.
7 Those who follow the path of service, who have completely

purified themselves and conquered their senses and self-will, see the
Self in all creatures and are untouched by any action they perform.
8 Those who know this truth, whose consciousness is unified, think

always, “I am not the doer.” While seeing or hearing, touching or

smelling; eating, moving about, or sleeping; breathing 9 or speaking,
letting go or holding on, even opening or closing the eyes, they
understand that these are only the movements of the senses among
sense objects.
10 Those who surrender to Brahman all selfish attachments are like

the leaf of a lotus floating clean and dry in water. Sin cannot touch
them. 11 Renouncing their selfish attachments, those who follow the
path of service work with body, senses, and mind for the sake of
self-purification.
12 Those whose consciousness is unified abandon all attachment to

the results of action and attain supreme peace. But those whose
desires are fragmented, who are selfishly attached to the results of
their work, are bound in everything they do.
13 Those who renounce attachment in all their deeds live content in

the “city of nine gates,” the body, as its master. They are not driven
to act, nor do they involve others in action.
14 Neither the sense of acting, nor actions, nor the connection of

cause and effect comes from the Lord of this world. These three
arise from nature.
15 The Lord does not partake in the good and evil deeds of any

person; judgment is clouded when wisdom is obscured by
ignorance. 16 But ignorance is destroyed by knowledge of the Self
within. The light of this knowledge shines like the sun, revealing the
supreme Brahman. 17 Those who cast off sin through this
knowledge, absorbed in the Lord and established in him as their one
goal and refuge, are not reborn as separate creatures.
18 Those who possess this wisdom have equal regard for all. They

see the same Self in a spiritual aspirant and an outcaste, in an
elephant, a cow, and a dog. 19 Such people have mastered life. With
even mind they rest in Brahman, who is perfect and is everywhere
the same. 20 They are not elated by good fortune nor depressed by
bad. With mind established in Brahman, they are free from delusion.

21 Not dependent on any external support, they realize the joy of

spiritual awareness. With consciousness unified through meditation,
they live in abiding joy.
22 Pleasures conceived in the world of the senses have a beginning

and an end and give birth to misery, Arjuna. The wise do not look
for happiness in them. 23 But those who overcome the impulses of
lust and anger which arise in the body are made whole and live in
joy. 24 They find their joy, their rest, and their light completely
within themselves. United with the Lord, they attain nirvana in
Brahman.
25 Healed of their sins and conflicts, working for the good of all

beings, the holy sages attain nirvana in Brahman. 26 Free from anger
and selfish desire, unified in mind, those who follow the path of
yoga and realize the Self are established forever in that supreme
state.
27 Closing their eyes, steadying their breathing, and focusing their

attention on the center of spiritual consciousness, 28 the wise master
their senses, mind, and intellect through meditation. Self-realization
is their only goal. Freed from selfish desire, fear, and anger, they
live in freedom always. 29 Knowing me as the friend of all creatures,
the Lord of the universe, the end of all offerings and all spiritual
disciplines, they attain eternal peace.

Chapter Six

The Practice of Meditation
This is surely one of the most intriguing chapters of the Gita, for here we
are given a detailed explanation of meditation addressed to the layperson.
The same meditation techniques are given in more esoteric writings, such as
the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, but the Gita does it more simply, without any
unnecessary mystery or complexity.
This chapter also explores the question, “Who is the true yogi?” This
word yogi, if it has any associations for the Western reader, is likely to bring
up images of rather far-out types who do strange contortions with their
bodies. Yogis are still thought of as standing on their heads or reclining on a
bed of nails. It is true that there are many practitioners of a kind of yoga that
involves physical exercises and postures; and there are those who have
achieved remarkable feats like lying on beds of nails, or even being buried
alive and surviving. But this physical side of yoga (called hatha yoga, “the
yoga of force”) is not what is meant in the Gita. In fact, though physical
techniques have a place, the Gita regards undue emphasis on them as
extreme, not belonging to the normal course of spiritual development.
In the Gita, the word yogi often has a more modest definition: it can
mean a person who does his or her job with detachment from the rewards
(6:1), or it can be rendered as “one who has attained the goal of
meditation.” For yogi literally means “one who is accomplished in yoga,”
and yoga means “integration of the spirit.” In this sense, yoga means
wholeness or the process of becoming whole at the deepest spiritual level.
The word yoga is also often used as a synonym for raja yoga, the practice
of meditation as taught by Patanjali; for meditation is the direct means of
becoming integrated, united with one’s truest, deepest Self. Thus a yogi,
among other things, is a person who is an adept at meditation.
Until now, Krishna has been instructing Arjuna in the need for karma
yoga, the active life of service. Now he is ready to initiate his disciple into
the practice of the more interior disciplines of the spiritual life. Karma
yoga, he says, is the path for those who wish to climb the mountain of Selfrealization; for those who have reached the summit, the path is shama, the
peace of contemplation. At the beginning of the spiritual life, great exertion

is required; as the summit is approached, though the climb gets no easier,
the dimension of contemplation or stillness is added. Many spiritual
traditions, of course, use this image when speaking of the religious quest.
The mountaintop is the place where the holy, like Moses, commune with
God; and St. John of the Cross describes the path to union with God as
climbing the mountain of Carmel.
In climbing this mountain, willpower, self-help, intense personal effort,
are absolute essentials. The literal translation of verse 5 is “one should lift
oneself up by one’s Self” – a play on the word atman, which can mean the
highest Self as well as self in the ordinary sense. One’s self is thus one’s
friend or one’s own enemy. The “lower self,” as Western mystics sometimes
call it, is self-will – will in the negative, selfish sense. An unruly will
twisted toward self-aggrandizement is an enemy lurking right inside the
fort, where it can do the most damage. But those who “have conquered
themselves by themselves” have their truest friend in the Self. Only those
who have genuine self-discipline, who are “self-conquered,” live in peace.
These, Krishna says, are true yogis. They cannot harbor any malice,
cannot even bring themselves to look upon anyone as an enemy. They are
samabuddhi, “of equable mind.” The true yogi, the person who is truly
integrated inside, looks upon and feels everyone else’s joy and sorrow just
as if it were his own. He sees the Self in all beings, everywhere.
How is this self-conquest to be made? Very simply, the Gita teaches that
the mind must be made one-pointed through the practice of meditation. This
is the basic technique. In the Gita we do not see the tendency for
elaboration, for ritual and mystery, that we sometimes find in the Hindu
tradition. Krishna simply tells Arjuna, first, that he must find an appropriate
place to meditate. A suitable spot for his practice will be clean and
comfortable. In a nod to tradition, one verse recommends the meditation
seat be covered with kusha grass and a deer skin – the traditional seat of the
yogi. The important thing, however, is not how the meditation cushion is
constructed, but what is going on in the mind. Meditation is an internal
discipline to make the mind one-pointed, absolutely concentrated.
Second, Krishna offers a bit of advice about holding the body, head, and
neck in a straight line. This may seem esoteric – a reference to the
contortion-school of yoga – but actually it has a practical purpose. Sitting
absolutely straight, with the spinal column erect, prevents drowsiness. Also,

in advanced stages of meditation, it allows for the free flow of vital energy
or kundalini (see Glossary).
Then practical advice is given: moderation is the path. Neither extreme
asceticism nor indulgence will aid meditation. A superficial acquaintance
with Hindu culture may leave the impression that it fosters either the
sensuality of the Kama Sutra or the asceticism of the hermit. It is true that
in Indian civilization we can easily see the ultimate development of the
sensual and beautiful life in its finest manifestation, in painting, sculpture,
music, and dance. And Indian cuisine is famous for its incredible variety of
flavors and spices. India also presents us with the austere simplicity of the
wandering holy man or sadhu. The Gita, however, recommends the middle
path. Success in meditation, Krishna says, comes neither to those who eat or
sleep too much nor to those who eat or sleep too little. The body should be
neither overindulged nor treated harshly – the same recommendation the
Buddha was to offer later, after many years of severe asceticism.
This chapter contains the famous verse (6:19) comparing the mind to a
steady flame. By its very nature the untrained mind is restless, constantly
wandering here and there in trying to fulfil its desires. It flickers wildly like
a flame in a storm – never blown completely out, yet at the mercy of the
wind. Wherever it wanders, Krishna says, it must be brought back to its
source; it must learn to rest in the Self. Once it is at home in the depths of
contemplation, the mind becomes steady, like an upright, unflickering flame
in a windless place. In this deep meditation, and only there, can the human
being find true fulfillment. Then “the still mind touches Brahman and
enjoys bliss.”
Now Arjuna asks the inevitable question. Krishna is way ahead of him,
and the struggling disciple calls out, “Wait a minute!” or words to that
effect. He says, “My mind is so restless and unsteady that I cannot even
comprehend anything about this state of mystic peace you are talking
about.” The mind is so powerful, so turbulent, that trying to bring it under
control is like trying to catch the wind.
Krishna admits that the mind is terribly hard to train, but he maintains
that it can be done through regular practice if one has detachment. It is
interesting that he does not offer to help Arjuna here; that will come later.
For now, he tells Arjuna that he must do it for himself, through hard work
and detachment from private, personal motives.

Then Arjuna asks a rather surprising question: what happens to the
person who believes in a spiritual goal but does not pursue it to the end?
What if one of his more powerful compulsive desires gets the better of him,
scattering his resolution the way a cloud is scattered by the wind? Arjuna
must be at least partly convinced that there is something to all this, but
either he is not ready to begin meditating or he is afraid that somehow he
might fail if he tried. If he were to fail, he asks, would he have lost
everything – all that he had given up in worldly life as well as his goal of
self-fulfillment?
Affectionately, Krishna assures Arjuna that no attempt to improve his
spiritual condition could possibly be a wasted effort. Even looking ahead to
the next life, he has nothing to lose and everything to gain. He will be
reborn in a household suitable for taking up his quest where he left off. In
his next life, he will feel drawn to the spiritual goal once again, and he will
have a head start. The general Hindu belief is that Self-realization requires
many, many lives of spiritual discipline. –D.M.

6: Practice of Meditation
KRISHNA
1 It is not those who lack energy or refrain from action, but those

who work without expectation of reward who attain the goal of
meditation. Theirs is true renunciation. 2 Therefore, Arjuna, you
should understand that renunciation and the performance of selfless
service are the same. Those who cannot renounce attachment to the
results of their work are far from the path.
3 For aspirants who want to climb the mountain of spiritual

awareness, the path is selfless work; for those who have ascended to
yoga the path is stillness and peace. 4 When a person has freed
himself from attachment to the results of work, and from desires for
the enjoyment of sense objects, he ascends to the unitive state.
5 Reshape yourself through the power of your will; never let

yourself be degraded by self-will. The will is the only friend of the
Self, and the will is the only enemy of the Self.
6 To those who have conquered themselves, the will is a friend. But

it is the enemy of those who have not found the Self within them.
7 The supreme Reality stands revealed in the consciousness of those

who have conquered themselves. They live in peace, alike in cold
and heat, pleasure and pain, praise and blame.
8 They are completely fulfilled by spiritual wisdom and Self-

realization. Having conquered their senses, they have climbed to the
summit of human consciousness. To such people a clod of dirt, a
stone, and gold are the same. 9 They are equally disposed to family,

enemies, and friends, to those who support them and those who are
hostile, to the good and the evil alike. Because they are impartial,
they rise to great heights.
10 Those who aspire to the state of yoga should seek the Self in

inner solitude through meditation. With body and mind controlled
they should constantly practice one-pointedness, free from
expectations and attachment to material possessions.
11 Select a clean spot, neither too high nor too low, and seat yourself

firmly on a cloth, a deerskin, and kusha grass. 12 Then, once seated,
strive to still your thoughts. Make your mind one-pointed in
meditation, and your heart will be purified. 13 Hold your body, head,
and neck firmly in a straight line, and keep your eyes from
wandering. 14 With all fears dissolved in the peace of the Self and
all desires dedicated to Brahman, controlling the mind and fixing it
on me, sit in meditation with me as your only goal. 15 With senses
and mind constantly controlled through meditation, united with the
Self within, an aspirant attains nirvana, the state of abiding joy and
peace in me.
16 Arjuna, those who eat too much or eat too little, who sleep too

much or sleep too little, will not succeed in meditation. 17 But those
who are temperate in eating and sleeping, work and recreation, will
come to the end of sorrow through meditation. 18 Through constant
effort they learn to withdraw the mind from selfish cravings and
absorb it in the Self. Thus they attain the state of union.
19 When meditation is mastered, the mind is unwavering like the

flame of a lamp in a windless place. 20 In the still mind, in the
depths of meditation, the Self reveals itself. Beholding the Self by
means of the Self, an aspirant knows the joy and peace of complete
fulfillment. 21 Having attained that abiding joy beyond the senses,
revealed in the stilled mind, he never swerves from the eternal truth.
22 He desires nothing else, and cannot be shaken by the heaviest
burden of sorrow.

23 The practice of meditation frees one from all affliction. This is the

path of yoga. Follow it with determination and sustained
enthusiasm. 24 Renouncing wholeheartedly all selfish desires and
expectations, use your will to control the senses. 25 Little by little,
through patience and repeated effort, the mind will become stilled in
the Self.
26 Wherever the mind wanders, restless and diffuse in its search for

satisfaction without, lead it within; train it to rest in the Self 27
Abiding joy comes to those who still the mind. Freeing themselves
from the taint of self-will, with their consciousness unified, they
become one with Brahman.
28 The infinite joy of touching Brahman is easily attained by those

who are free from the burden of evil and established within
themselves. 29 They see the Self in every creature and all creation in
the Self. With consciousness unified through meditation, they see
everything with an equal eye.
30 I am ever present to those who have realized me in every

creature. Seeing all life as my manifestation, they are never
separated from me. 31 They worship me in the hearts of all, and all
their actions proceed from me. Wherever they may live, they abide
in me.
32 When a person responds to the joys and sorrows of others as if

they were his own, he has attained the highest state of spiritual
union.
ARJUNA
33 O Krishna, the stillness of divine union which you describe is

beyond my comprehension. How can the mind, which is so restless,
attain lasting peace? 34 Krishna, the mind is restless, turbulent,
powerful, violent; trying to control it is like trying to tame the wind.
KRISHNA

35 It is true that the mind is restless and difficult to control. But it

can be conquered, Arjuna, through regular practice and detachment.
36 Those who lack self-control will find it difficult to progress in
meditation; but those who are self-controlled, striving earnestly
through the right means, will attain the goal.
ARJUNA
37 Krishna, what happens to the man who has faith but who lacks

self-control and wanders from the path, not attaining success in
yoga? 38 If a man becomes deluded on the spiritual path, will he lose
the support of both worlds, like a cloud scattered in the sky? 39
Krishna, you can dispel all doubts; remove this doubt which binds
me.
KRISHNA
40 Arjuna, my son, such a person will not be destroyed. No one who

does good work will ever come to a bad end, either here or in the
world to come.
41 When such people die, they go to other realms where the

righteous live. They dwell there for countless years and then are
reborn into a home which is pure and prosperous. 42 Or they may be
born into a family where meditation is practiced; to be born into
such a family is extremely rare. 43 The wisdom they have acquired
in previous lives will be reawakened, Arjuna, and they will strive
even harder for Self-realization. 44 Indeed, they will be driven on by
the strength of their past disciplines. Even one who inquires after
the practice of meditation rises above those who simply perform
rituals.
45 Through constant effort over many lifetimes, a person becomes

purified of all selfish desires and attains the supreme goal of life.
46 Meditation is superior to severe asceticism and the path of

knowledge. It is also superior to selfless service. May you attain the
goal of meditation, Arjuna! 47 Even among those who meditate, that

man or woman who worships me with perfect faith, completely
absorbed in me, is the most firmly established in yoga.

Chapter Seven

Wisdom from Realization
In Sanskrit this chapter is called “The Yoga of Wisdom and Realization” –
or “The Yoga of Wisdom from Realization.” The term used for wisdom is
jnana; for realization, vijnana. There is room for confusion in this
terminology, as jnana and vijnana are open to differing interpretations. Both
words are from the root jna, “to know,” which is related to the Greek word
gnosis. The prefix vi added to a noun usually intensifies its meaning; so
vijnana could mean to know intensely or to a greater degree. In this context,
however, jnana is the standard term for the highest kind of knowledge: not
scholarship or book-learning but direct knowledge of God, spiritual
wisdom. If we take jnana in this sense, we are not left with an obvious
meaning for vijnana, a “more intense kind of jnana.” Ramakrishna takes
vijnana to mean an intimate, practical familiarity with God, the ability to
carry through in daily affairs with the more abstract understanding that is
jnana. Ramakrishna says, “One who has merely heard of fire has ajnana,
ignorance. One who has seen fire has jnana. But one who has actually built
a fire and cooked on it has vijnana.”
In this chapter we find ourselves following several trails and sometimes
lose the unifying theme, which is knowledge of the supreme reality
underlying nature. Eventually, however, we come back to the starting point:
knowledge contrasted with ignorance, transcendent reality as opposed to the
phenomenal world.
But to pursue the byways. First, Krishna’s “two natures” are discussed.
On the one hand, he has created out of himself the elements and all things
that make up the phenomenal world. Beyond this is Krishna’s spiritual
nature as the transcendent Lord of the universe. Here the Gita is referring to
a concept that later became a basis of the Sankhya school of Hindu
philosophy. Sankhya recognized two fundamental principles underlying all
things: prakriti, the principle of mind and matter, and Purusha, the principle
of pure spirit. The union of these two eternal, fundamental forces sets in
motion the creation of the world as we know it. Their union also shapes and
defines all ordinary human experience. In Sankhya, the goal of Self-

realization is seen as the final freeing of the spirit (Purusha) from its
flirtation with mind and matter (prakriti).
Unlike Sankhya, however, in the Gita it is Krishna who is behind both
prakriti and Purusha. In this chapter, Krishna is presented as the Creator of
the world. His divine nature can be glimpsed in his bewildering and
wonderful creation. In much Hindu mythology, it is the god Brahma who
takes credit for creating the world. It is he, the four-faced deity, who has
flung forth the manifold worlds of this and former (as well as future)
universes. But in the mythology of Vishnu, Brahma is born in the lotus that
grows from Vishnu’s navel. The lotus is Vishnu’s womb. In it Brahma is
born, and at Vishnu’s urging he creates the worlds. Vishnu is the real
Creator; Brahma is a demigod born of Vishnu’s will to create. Here in the
Gita Krishna directly assumes all the roles and honors usually shared with
the other aspects of God worshipped in the Hindu faith. It is not that these
other divine personifications are rejected, but simply that all attention is on
Krishna. For the author of the Gita, Krishna is the form of God to be
worshipped, and for the time being all other forms of God disappear.
Krishna alone is. In fact, one verse states that whatever other god one seems
to worship, one is in reality approaching Krishna himself. Worshipping him,
knowing him, enables the devotee to attain the goal.
Though the word is not used in the Gita, the idea of the world as
Krishna’s lila, his play, became a cherished theme of later Hinduism.
Krishna, it is said, created the world in play: just as a child might desire to
have companions to play with, Krishna desired companions, and made the
world. Krishna participates in the game of life; his divine qualities shine
through in the world wherever there is excellence of any kind. He is, he
tells Arjuna, the essence of every created thing: the sapidity of water, the
brightness of fire, the effort of the spiritual aspirant. This may be what is
meant by the vijnana of our title – the mystic’s vision of the divine as
present here and now is perhaps the real meaning of the term.
The word maya appears here, though not for the first time in the Gita.
Just as the concepts of prakriti and Purusha are later developed in Sankhya
philosophy, maya is later built into the formal structure of Vedanta, another
of the six major schools of Indian philosophy. The word maya comes from
the root ma, “to measure out,” and originally meant the power of a deity to
create, especially to create what Indian philosophy calls “name and form”:
matter and its percepts. Maya was the magical capacity to create form and

illusion – a god’s divine power to put on a disguise, or to fling forth world
after world of life. Maya is also the outward look of things, the passing
show that conceals immortal being. Maya can be both delightful and
dangerous, alluring and yet treacherous. The gunas, the three basic qualities
of all created things, swirl within the world of maya. Crossing over the
ocean of maya is the goal of the wise voyager, and one boat is devotion. In
this chapter the Gita begins to stress the importance of love and devotion –
themes that later become dominant.
Krishna’s true nature is hidden by maya (7:25). The dangers of maya are
not depicted strongly in this chapter, but the “delusions” – moha – of life in
maya’s world are hinted at; they are, essentially, the self-centered
attachments Krishna has been warning against. Moha, which means
confusion or delusion, is something like dreaming while awake, “living in a
dream.” The duality of attachment and aversion (love and hate) beguiles the
mind into this moha-swoon right at birth (7:27). Knowing Krishna, and
devotion to him, is the way beyond this delusion. Thus chapter 7 contrasts
wisdom (jnana and vijnana) with the delusion (moha) of spiritual
ignorance.
We find here many seminal ideas that are elaborated in the later
philosophies of Sankhya and Vedanta. These concepts of prakriti, Purusha,
and maya do not originate with the Gita, however. The word maya appears
in the Rig Veda, the most ancient of the Vedas, and Purusha is a recurring
theme in the Upanishads. The Gita is a halfway point between the
spontaneous insights of the Upanishads and the later, highly formalized
philosophical systems. In the Gita we find an organized presentation of
these and other key concepts without a cumbersome technical explanation. –
D.M.

7: Wisdom from Realization
KRISHNA
1 With your mind intent on me, Arjuna, discipline yourself with the

practice of yoga. Depend on me completely. Listen, and I will dispel
all your doubts; you will come to know me fully and be united with
me.
2 I will give you both jnana and vijnana. When both these are

realized, there is nothing more you need to know.
3 One person in many thousands may seek perfection, yet of these

only a few reach the goal and come to realize me. 4 Earth, water,
fire, air, akasha, mind, intellect, and ego – these are the eight
divisions of my prakriti. 5 But beyond this I have another, higher
nature, Arjuna; it supports the whole universe and is the source of
life in all beings.
6 In these two aspects of my nature is the womb of all creation. The

birth and dissolution of the cosmos itself take place in me. 7 There is
nothing that exists separate from me, Arjuna. The entire universe is
suspended from me as my necklace of jewels.
8 Arjuna, I am the taste of pure water and the radiance of the sun

and moon. I am the sacred word and the sound heard in air, and the
courage of human beings. 9 I am the sweet fragrance in the earth and
the radiance of fire; I am the life in every creature and the striving
of the spiritual aspirant.
10 My eternal seed, Arjuna, is to be found in every creature. I am the

power of discrimination in those who are intelligent, and the glory

of the noble. 11 In those who are strong, I am strength, free from
passion and selfish attachment. I am desire itself, if that desire is in
harmony with the purpose of life.
12 The states of sattva, rajas, and tamas come from me, but I am not

in them. 13 These three gunas deceive the world: people fail to look
beyond them to me, supreme and imperishable. 14 The three gunas
make up my divine maya, difficult to overcome. But they cross over
this maya who take refuge in me. 15 Others are deluded by maya;
performing evil deeds, they have no devotion to me. Having lost all
discrimination, they follow the way of their lower nature.
16 Good people come to worship me for different reasons. Some

come to the spiritual life because of suffering, some in order to
understand life; some come through a desire to achieve life’s
purpose, and some come who are men and women of wisdom. 17
Unwavering in devotion, always united with me, the man or woman
of wisdom surpasses all the others. To them I am the dearest
beloved, and they are very dear to me. 18 All those who follow the
spiritual path are blessed. But the wise who are always established
in union, for whom there is no higher goal than me, may be
regarded as my very Self.
19 After many births the wise seek refuge in me, seeing me

everywhere and in everything. Such great souls are very rare. 20
There are others whose discrimination is misled by many desires.
Following their own nature, they worship lower gods, practicing
various rites.
21 When a person is devoted to something with complete faith, I

unify his faith in that. 22 Then, when faith is completely unified, one
gains the object of devotion. In this way, every desire is fulfilled by
me. 23 Those whose understanding is small attain only transient
satisfaction: those who worship the gods go to the gods. But my
devotees come to me.
24 Through lack of understanding, people believe that I, the

Unmanifest, have entered into some form. They fail to realize my

true nature, which transcends birth and death. 25 Few see through
the veil of maya. The world, deluded, does not know that I am
without birth and changeless. 26 I know everything about the past,
the present, and the future, Arjuna; but there is no one who knows
me completely.
27 Delusion arises from the duality of attraction and aversion,

Arjuna; every creature is deluded by these from birth. 28 But those
who have freed themselves from all wrongdoing are firmly
established in worship of me. Their actions are pure, and they are
free from the delusion caused by the pairs of opposites.
29 Those who take refuge in me, striving for liberation from old age

and death, come to know Brahman, the Self, and the nature of all
action. 30 Those who see me ruling the cosmos, who see me in the
adhibhuta, the adhidaiva, and the adhiyajna, are conscious of me
even at the time of death.

Chapter Eight

Eternal Godhead
This chapter alludes briefly to several important concepts presented more
fully in the Upanishads, and it will be helpful to quote the Upanishads to
elucidate these points. Also, this chapter presents a very ancient view of the
soul’s journey after death. These ideas about the afterlife did not originate
in the Gita, and are even more ancient than the Upanishads. Another ancient
concept here is that of a cyclical universe, which is elaborated in other
Hindu scriptures in great detail; this chapter merely refers to it in passing.
The chapter begins with Arjuna asking what appear to be questions of
theology, but the role of theologian does not fit him naturally. These
questions are asked in response to the technical terms mentioned in the last
verse of chapter 7. The sense of Krishna’s answer is in accord with what he
said earlier about his maya: he is God immanent in all things as well as God
transcendent.
But it is Arjuna’s other question that determines the direction the
discourse now takes. Arjuna asks how Krishna can be known at the hour of
death. Here, of course, Arjuna means Krishna in his cosmic, mystical
aspect, so he is asking in essence, “How can the Self-realized person enter
the supreme state of immortality at the time of death?” Krishna replies that
whoever remembers him at the time of death will enter madbhavam, “my
being.” If Arjuna can remember Krishna in the hour of death, he will be
united with Krishna and enter into immortality.
In fact, whatever it may be, the content of the mind at the hour of death
directs the soul in its journey to rebirth. Thus the mind influences the
evolution of the soul as it moves into the next life. Whatever a person thinks
about in life – his or her deepest motivations – are likely to be the last
thoughts at the time of death. So there is a continuity between this life and
the next, and all the baggage of desire and motivation goes right along with
the soul. But here Krishna is talking about the person – he hopes Arjuna
will be such a one – who has no worldly baggage, who will remember
Krishna at the final hour.
To ensure he will focus his devotion on Krishna at the hour of death,
Arjuna should make a practice of remembering him continually now. If he

makes his mind one-pointed in meditation and learns to focus his being on
Krishna, then naturally at the time of death he will think of nothing else.
Otherwise, in the chaos of death, he will panic and lose his way.
Krishna describes in detail what happens to consciousness at the moment
of death (8:12–13). These verses actually describe the yogis as being in
control of the process of death. Directing their consciousness step by step
through the difficult ordeal of leaving the body, they attain the supreme
goal. This idea is also accepted by one of the greatest teachers of meditation
in ancient India, Patanjali, who says in the Yoga Sutras that the yogi dies at
will. Similar descriptions of the death process occur in the Upanishads,
though there the dying person is not necessarily in control. The Upanishads
give a detailed account:
When the Self seems to become weak and sink into unconsciousness,
the vital breaths gather to him. Then he takes with him those particles of
light and descends into the heart. When the consciousness that is in the
eye turns back, the dying person no longer sees any form. “He is
becoming one,” they say; “he does not see.” “He is becoming one,” they
say; “he does not smell.” “He is becoming one,” they say; “he does not
taste.” “He is becoming one,” they say; “he does not speak.” “He is
becoming one,” they say; “he does not hear.” “He is becoming one,”
they say; “he does not think or touch or know.” The point of his heart
lights up, and by that light the Self departs, either through the eye, or the
skull, or through some other door of the body. And when he departs, life
departs: and when life departs, all other vital forces depart after it. He is
conscious, and with consciousness he leaves the body. Then his
knowledge and his works and his previous impressions go along with
him. (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad iv.4.1–2)
First consciousness is withdrawn from the senses. The dying no longer
hear or see what is going on around them. They are still conscious, but the
“light” of consciousness has been withdrawn from the senses, here called
the “gates” of the body. There are said to be nine such gates: two eyes, two
nostrils, two ears, the mouth, and the organs of generation and excretion.
Sometimes two more are added: the navel and the sagittal suture, located at
the top of the skull and called in Sanskrit brahmarandhra, “the aperture of
Brahman.”

When consciousness has been withdrawn from these gates, Krishna says,
“the mind is placed [“locked up”] in the heart.” (8:12) Here, as in Christian
mysticism, it is the heart and not the head that is taken to be the home of the
soul. Probably what is meant is the heart chakra, the center of
consciousness corresponding to the center of the chest. Prana (vital energy)
and awareness have been withdrawn from the outer frontiers of personality
and consolidated within. At this stage of the death process an ordinary
person has no access to the will; but it is just here that prana, with
conscious awareness, must be made to move upwards to the head. If prana
leaves the body through the brahmarandhra, there will be no rebirth: that is,
the dying person will enter samadhi at the time of death. In samadhi, prana
is withdrawn from lower levels of awareness to rush upwards to the seventh
center at the crown of the head. This is possible only for the yogi who has
thoroughly mastered meditation and the control of prana. If prana exits
through some other one of the eleven doors of the body, the Upanishads say,
the state of immortality will not be gained:
When he departs from this body, he ascends with the rays of the sun,
repeating the syllable Om. As soon as he thinks of it, he comes to the
sun. That, indeed, is the door to the next world. Those who know enter;
those who do not know are stopped. There is a verse:
A hundred and one subtle tracks lead from the heart;
One of these goes upwards to the crown of the head.
Going up by it, he goes to eternal life.
Others depart in various directions.
(Chandogya Upanishad viii.6.5–6)
In the Gita, as well as in this passage from the Chandogya Upanishad, the
mantram Om is used. If the yogis can remember the mantram even as
consciousness itself is departing the body – and, the Gita adds, if they can
meditate on Krishna – they will go to the “highest goal.” Relinquishing the
body in a state of samadhi, they attain the mystic eternity that is union with
Krishna.
In this chapter the Gita alludes to the two paths, “northern” and
“southern,” that the soul may take after death. Verses 24–25 present in

abbreviated form what the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad spells out in obscure
detail:
Those who know this, who meditate upon Truth with faith while living
in the forest, go to the light, from light to day, from day to the fortnight
of the moon’s waxing, from the waxing fortnight to the six months of
the sun’s northern journey, from those six months to the world of the
devas, from the world of the devas to the sun, from the sun to the
lightning. Then a spirit approaches them and leads them to the world of
Brahman. In that world they live for eternal ages. They do not return
again.
But those who conquer worlds through sacrifice, charity, and austerity
pass into the smoke, from the smoke into the night, from the night into
the fortnight of the waning moon, from the fortnight of the waning
moon into the six months of the sun’s southern journey, from there into
the world of the ancestors, from the world of the ancestors into the
moon, . . . and from there to rebirth. (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad
vi.2.15–16)
“Northern and southern paths” refers to the path of the sun, which seems
to move northward after the winter solstice and southward after the summer
solstice. To die during the period in which the sun is moving southward was
considered inauspicious; dying during the period after the winter solstice,
when the sun is moving back north, meant the soul might take the northern
path which leads to immortality. In the Gita and the Upanishads, this
“northern path” has come to signify that the soul has been released from
karma and need not be reborn. The southern path, by contrast, leads the soul
to a new birth in this world, a birth suitable to its karma. This view of the
soul’s journey after death has a primordial quality about it, giving the
feeling that it far predates even the Upanishads. Perhaps it is a belief of very
ancient times that found its way into the Upanishads, which say that the
spiritually ready soul makes the journey of the northern route while those
who have only practiced rituals take the southern.
This chapter also briefly alludes to the Days and Nights of Brahma.
Brahma is the Creator of the Hindu trinity, who brings forth the cosmos at
the will of Vishnu. But Brahma in a sense is not in control of this creative

process. Just as day follows night in eternal, unvarying rhythm, so does the
entire universe undergo cycles of creation, death, and new birth. As the Day
of Brahma dawns, the cosmos comes into being; as the Day comes to an
end, the entire creation dies and ceases to exist. Then, for a Night as long as
the cosmic Day, the universe rests. It ceases to be – or, rather, it continues
only in a subtle, unmanifest form, a dream in the mind of Vishnu, who lies
sleeping on the waves of the cosmic ocean. Then, without deviating from
the eternal rhythm, the cosmos is reborn when the Night is over. The new
universe dawns, and Brahma once again moves into his active, creative
Day.
Scholars have noted that this grand vision of the cosmos being born,
dying, and being reborn for eternity – cosmos after cosmos arising from the
black immensity of nothingness – is quite similar to modern theories of the
expanding and contracting universe put forward by contemporary
cosmology. The vast time spans accepted by present-day physics are also
similar to the cosmic Days and Nights of Brahma. Each Day lasts for a
thousand yugas, which equals 4,320,000,000 years. For this near-eternity of
time the universe lives and grows; then it dies and lies dormant for an equal
time, before the new Day dawns.
There is a state of being, however, that is higher than the perishable
cosmos, which is not born and does not die the cosmic death. Here (8:20) it
is called simply avyakta, the Unmanifest. This is the supreme goal of all
living things, and it is Krishna’s home (8:21). Returning to this final resting
place, the soul enters into immortal bliss and is not reborn. –D.M.

8: Eternal Godhead
ARJUNA
1 O Krishna, what is Brahman, and what is the nature of action?

What is the adhyatma, the adhibhuta, the adhidaiva? 2 What is the
adhiyajna, the supreme sacrifice, and how is it to be offered? How
are the self-controlled united with you at the time of death?
KRISHNA
3 My highest nature, the imperishable Brahman, gives every

creature its existence and lives in every creature as the adhyatma.
My action is creation and the bringing forth of creatures. 4 The
adhibhuta is the perishable body; the adhidaiva is Purusha, eternal
spirit. The adhiyajna, the supreme sacrifice, is made to me as the
Lord within you.
5 Those who remember me at the time of death will come to me. Do

not doubt this. 6 Whatever occupies the mind at the time of death
determines the destination of the dying; always they will tend
toward that state of being. 7 Therefore, remember me at all times
and fight on. With your heart and mind intent on me, you will surely
come to me. 8 When you make your mind one-pointed through
regular practice of meditation, you will find the supreme glory of
the Lord.
9 The Lord is the supreme poet, the first cause, the sovereign ruler,

subtler than the tiniest particle, the support of all, inconceivable,
bright as the sun, beyond darkness. 10 Remembering him in this way
at the time of death, through devotion and the power of meditation,
with your mind completely stilled and your concentration fixed in

the center of spiritual awareness between the eyebrows, you will
realize the supreme Lord.
11 I will tell you briefly of the eternal state all scriptures affirm,

which can be entered only by those who are self-controlled and free
from selfish passions. Those whose lives are dedicated to Brahman
attain this supreme goal.
12 Remembering me at the time of death, close down the doors of

the senses and place the mind in the heart. Then, while absorbed in
meditation, focus all energy upwards to the head. 13 Repeating in
this state the divine name, the syllable Om that represents the
changeless Brahman, you will go forth from the body and attain the
supreme goal.
14 I am easily attained by the person who always remembers me and

is attached to nothing else. Such a person is a true yogi, Arjuna. 15
Great souls make their lives perfect and discover me; they are freed
from mortality and the suffering of this separate existence. 16 Every
creature in the universe is subject to rebirth, Arjuna, except the one
who is united with me.
17 Those who understand the cosmic laws know that the Day of

Brahma ends after a thousand yugas and the Night of Brahma ends
after a thousand yugas. 18 When the day of Brahma dawns, forms
are brought forth from the Unmanifest; when the night of Brahma
comes, these forms merge in the Formless again. 19 This multitude
of beings is created and destroyed again and again in the succeeding
days and nights of Brahma. 20 But beyond this formless state there
is another, unmanifested reality, which is eternal and is not
dissolved when the cosmos is destroyed. 21 Those who realize life’s
supreme goal know that I am unmanifested and unchanging. Having
come home to me, they never return to separate existence.
22 This supreme Lord who pervades all existence, the true Self of all

creatures, may be realized through undivided love. 23 There are two
paths, Arjuna, which the soul may follow at the time of death. One
leads to rebirth and the other to liberation.

24 The six months of the northern path of the sun, the path of light,

of fire, of day, of the bright fortnight, leads knowers of Brahman to
the supreme goal. 25 The six months of the southern path of the sun,
the path of smoke, of night, of the dark fortnight, leads other souls
to the light of the moon and to rebirth.
26 These two paths, the light and the dark, are said to be eternal,

leading some to liberation and others to rebirth. 27 Once you have
known these two paths, Arjuna, you can never be deluded again.
Attain this knowledge through perseverance in yoga. 28 There is
merit in studying the scriptures, in selfless service, austerity, and
giving, but the practice of meditation carries you beyond all these to
the supreme abode of the highest Lord.

Chapter Nine

The Royal Path
This chapter praises Krishna as the Supreme Being who has created the
world and dwells immanent in his creation. Krishna’s exalted nature is
stressed, and warning is given to those who think that God is limited to his
creation. It is true that Krishna has taken on a human form, but those who
see only a limited human being and show him disrespect are courting great
spiritual harm. These verses contain a warning for those who would
underestimate Krishna’s divine power.
In this chapter Krishna replaces the many gods and goddesses of the
usual Hindu pantheon, each of which represents a different divine power;
here Krishna is seen as containing within himself all such powers. It is
Krishna and Krishna alone who is to be worshipped: he is the goal, the
support, the only refuge, the one true friend; he is the beginning and the end
(9:18).
It follows that those who practice a ritual religion, offering the ritual
sacrifices ordained by the Vedas, do not attain the true goal of their lives.
True, they do enjoy heaven after death. But when their store of merit is used
up, they are born again in order to have another chance at turning away
from personal gain and aiming at life’s supreme goal. So long as they are
motivated only by self-centered desires they must be born again and again,
and their spiritual evolution either stands still or they make very little
progress.
Even these souls, however, are really worshipping Krishna, though they
do not know it. They seek Krishna, the Supreme Being, in all their
wanderings through many, many lives and even in their sojourns in heaven,
where they enjoy the reward of their good deeds. Because they do not know
his real nature, however, they will not attain the goal, but will be reborn.
An endless round of rebirths may seem like a living damnation of the
struggling soul – a harsh note that would be uncharacteristic of the Gita.
But this is not a question of damnation. The purpose of life is to realize
God, and until this is done, the soul cannot escape creating more karma
which has to be worked out, however many lives it might take. The choice
to turn toward Self-realization is always open.

The Gita does not dwell on the obstacles, however, but quickly goes on
to reveal Krishna’s more compassionate nature. It makes the point that
whatever a person deeply desires – whatever he or she worships – will
eventually be attained, in some life or other. In particular, to have real,
selfless love, regardless of the object, is to love Krishna, the ultimate good.
This kind of love, called bhakti, is far more potent than observances and
rituals – a point the Gita is slowly revealing. But to have this devotion
without understanding Krishna’s nature is not enough. In the end, to attain
his goal, Arjuna must have devotion and understand it is Krishna’s
universal aspect that he loves. Then he will truly attain the eternal, immortal
state.
This chapter contains a famous and very popular series of verses:
Whatever you do, make it an offering to me – the food you eat, the
sacrifices you make, the help you give, even your suffering. In this way
you will be freed from the bondage of karma, and from its results both
pleasant and painful. (9:27–28)
Krishna accepts every offering made to him in the right spirit; he assures
Arjuna of this. Then he demands that Arjuna make everything – every act,
every meal, every sacrifice, every gift, even his sufferings – an offering to
God. He demands this so that Arjuna can be released from the bondage of
karma. This is a new emphasis, a new way. If Arjuna can live in complete
union with Krishna’s will, doing everything for Krishna alone, then by that
very purity of will he will be free from selfish motives and thus released
from karma. His spirit will be free, and he will attain his goal of mystic
union with Krishna.
Krishna declares that he is impartial to all creatures: he neither favors nor
rejects anyone. It is their sincere love that is important. Those who are truly
devoted to Krishna live in him, and he abides in them. With some daring,
probably at the risk of discomfort to the more orthodox, Krishna adds that
even a sinner who takes wholehearted refuge in him becomes good. The
word used is sadhu, which literally means a good person but has come to
signify one who leads the spiritual life, giving up all selfish desires to
achieve the final goal. The word for sinner, sudurachara, should not be
passed by either. Su is literally “good”; dur is “bad”: thus “one whose
conduct is really bad,” as we might say “good and hot” to mean really hot.

Krishna promises that his devotees must attain peace at last. No one who
has genuine love and devotion can perish. The meaning here is taken to be
“perish” in a spiritual sense, come to spiritual harm. The message of this
chapter is simple. It contains no philosophy and only a little theology. The
one message is: anyone who has real love, love for the Lord of Love who is
in all creatures, will in the end attain the goal. This is the royal secret that
Krishna had promised to reveal. –D.M.

9: The Royal Path
KRISHNA
1 Because of your faith, I shall tell you the most profound of secrets:

obtaining both jnana and vijnana, you will be free from all evil.
2 This royal knowledge, this royal secret, is the greatest purifier.

Righteous and imperishable, it is a joy to practice and can be
directly experienced. 3 But those who have no faith in the supreme
law of life do not find me, Arjuna. They return to the world, passing
from death to death.
4 I pervade the entire universe in my unmanifested form. All

creatures find their existence in me, but I am not limited by them. 5
Behold my divine mystery! These creatures do not really dwell in
me, and though I bring them forth and support them, I am not
confined within them. 6 They move in me as the winds move in
every direction in space.
7 At the end of the eon these creatures return to unmanifested

matter; at the beginning of the next cycle I send them forth again. 8
Controlling my prakriti, again and again I bring forth these myriad
forms and subject them to the laws of prakriti. 9 None of these
actions binds me, Arjuna. I am unattached to them, so they do not
disturb my nature.
10 Under my watchful eye the laws of nature take their course. Thus

is the world set in motion; thus the animate and the inanimate are
created.

11 The immature do not look beyond physical appearances to see my

true nature as the Lord of all creation. 12 The knowledge of such
deluded people is empty; their lives are fraught with disaster and
evil, and their work and hopes are all in vain.
13 But truly great souls seek my divine nature. They worship me

with a one-pointed mind, having realized that I am the eternal
source of all. 14 Constantly striving, they make firm their resolve
and worship me without wavering. Full of devotion, they sing of my
divine glory.
15 Others follow the path of jnana, spiritual wisdom. They see that

where there is One, that One is me; where there are many, all are
me; they see my face everywhere.
16 I am the ritual and the sacrifice; I am true medicine and the

mantram. I am the offering and the fire which consumes it, and the
one to whom it is offered.
17 I am the father and mother of this universe, and its grandfather

too; I am its entire support. I am the sum of all knowledge, the
purifier, the syllable Om; I am the sacred scriptures, the Rig, Yajur,
and Sama Vedas.
18 I am the goal of life, the Lord and support of all, the inner

witness, the abode of all. I am the only refuge, the one true friend; I
am the beginning, the staying, and the end of creation; I am the
womb and the eternal seed.
19 I am heat; I give and withhold the rain. I am immortality and I am

death; I am what is and what is not.
20 Those who follow the rituals given in the Vedas, who offer

sacrifices and take soma, free themselves from evil and attain the
vast heaven of the gods, where they enjoy celestial pleasures. 21
When they have enjoyed these fully, their merit is exhausted and
they return to this land of death. Thus observing Vedic rituals but
caught in an endless chain of desires, they come and go.

22 Those who worship me and meditate on me constantly, without

any other thought – I will provide for all their needs.
23 Those who worship other gods with faith and devotion also

worship me, Arjuna, even if they do not observe the usual forms. 24
I am the object of all worship, its enjoyer and Lord. But those who
fail to realize my true nature must be reborn. 25 Those who worship
the devas will go to the realm of the devas; those who worship their
ancestors will be united with them after death. Those who worship
phantoms will become phantoms; but my devotees will come to me.
26 Whatever I am offered in devotion with a pure heart – a leaf, a

flower, fruit, or water – I accept with joy. 27 Whatever you do, make
it an offering to me – the food you eat, the sacrifices you make, the
help you give, even your suffering. 28 In this way you will be freed
from the bondage of karma, and from its results both pleasant and
painful. Then, firm in renunciation and yoga, with your heart free,
you will come to me.
29 I look upon all creatures equally; none are less dear to me and

none more dear. But those who worship me with love live in me,
and I come to life in them.
30 Even sinners become holy when they take refuge in me alone. 31

Quickly their souls conform to dharma and they attain to boundless
peace. Never forget this, Arjuna: no one who is devoted to me will
ever come to harm.
32 All those who take refuge in me, whatever their birth, race, sex,

or caste, will attain the supreme goal; this realization can be attained
even by those whom society scorns. 33 Kings and sages too seek this
goal with devotion. Therefore, having been born in this transient
and forlorn world, give all your love to me. 34 Fill your mind with
me; love me; serve me; worship me always. Seeking me in your
heart, you will at last be united with me.

Chapter Ten

Divine Splendor
Krishna goes deeper into the revelation of his divine being, revealing
himself as the source from which all things come, the One who is the reality
behind the many. Though the source of all virtues, he is also the ultimate
reality that transcends all opposites. Thus he is both happiness and
suffering, birth and death, being and nonbeing. Like the Brahman of the
Upanishads, he is beyond duality, utterly beyond the constricting categories
of the things of this world. His true nature is beyond the reach of thought.
He can only be known in the state of samadhi, where knower and known
become one.
Arjuna calls Krishna Purushottama, “the supreme Purusha, the supreme
Person.” Krishna is now no human charioteer but Bhagavan, “the
munificent Lord”; and Arjuna, leaving his warrior persona behind, now
stands revealed as a seeker after truth. At Arjuna’s request, Krishna now
reveals a few of his divine powers and attributes (vibhutis).
From this point on the chapter becomes difficult because of the many
unfamiliar names that are mentioned. In whatever category, Krishna is the
chief, the best, the most intense, the most beautiful, the most awesome, the
essence. Many of the allusions will be familiar – for example, among rivers
Krishna is the Ganges. But many of the names come from Hindu mythology
and are not well known. There is no room here to explain every name, but
the following paragraphs will highlight a few of importance.
First, Krishna is the Atman, the inner Self in all beings. It is fitting that
this be mentioned first, for of all his myriad manifestations this is the most
important, at least to the struggling spiritual aspirant that is Arjuna. Krishna
is Arjuna’s innermost Self, and that is how he is to be known in
contemplation. Of all the forms in which to meditate upon Krishna, the
Atman is mentioned first.
Krishna is Vishnu, the great compassionate, sustaining God of the Hindu
faith. It is Vishnu who cares so much about the sufferings of Mother Earth
and her children that he comes to earth again and again, in age after age, to
relieve oppression and renew righteousness.

Krishna is the sun, worshipped in India since ancient times. He is Indra,
the chief of the Vedic gods, the lord of storm and battle, who hurls the
thunderbolt against the enemies of the gods. In Vedic religion he is a mighty
lord, not to be trifled with, but later on he must admit defeat at the hands of
Krishna, who protects the people from Indra’s stormy wrath.
Krishna is also Shankara, the more beneficent aspect of the awesome
deity Rudra, better known as Shiva. Among mountains Krishna is Meru, the
high mountain home of Shiva and the other gods, the highest peak and
center of the world. Krishna is consciousness, the syllable Om, and the
mantram or holy name. He is the mythic horse and the fabulous elephant
that were produced when the cosmic ocean was churned for the elixir of
immortality.
Krishna is Ananta, the cosmic serpent on which Lord Vishnu sleeps. He
is Varuna, Vedic god of the oceans, and Yama, the god of death; among
demons (asuras) he is Prahlada, who, though born in the race of demons,
was devoted to God and never swayed in his love, even when his own
father tried to kill him. And of course Krishna is Rama, the great warriorprince – also an incarnation of Vishnu – whose exploits are told in the
immortal epic, the Ramayana.
Of all fields of knowledge, Krishna says, he is knowledge of the Self.
The study of Sanskrit and its grammar were important in ancient India, and
Krishna doesn’t neglect this field. He is A among letters; among compound
words he is the dvandva, which joins equals. He is the Gayatri – a particular
meter found in the poetry of the Vedas, but generally taken to be a famous
prayer from the Rig Veda (iii.62.10) composed in that meter, which has
been chanted every morning by countless worshippers for three thousand
years.
It is fitting that among seasons Krishna is the spring, the season of
flowers. Less easily understood is his claim to be the gambling of gamblers.
Krishna has a sense of play, and as gambling is the obsession of the
gambler, it seems natural that Krishna might claim this as a vibhuti. Also, in
ancient India gambling was considered a royal pastime, and no king of
repute would refuse a friendly game of dice.
In the human realm, Krishna is the “son of Vasudeva,” a prince of the
Vrishni line – in other words, the human form that is Arjuna’s friend and
charioteer. He is also Arjuna! And he is Vyasa, the composer of the Gita –
indeed, of the whole Mahabharata.

Wherever Arjuna finds strength, beauty, or power, Krishna concludes, he
should recognize it as coming from a spark of Krishna’s glory. Then, after
overwhelming Arjuna with this stupendous list of divine powers and
revelations, Krishna asks casually, “But what use is it to know all of these
details? The important fact is to know that I am, and that a tiny portion of
my being supports all things.” –D.M.

10: Divine Splendor
KRISHNA
1 Listen further, Arjuna, to my supreme teaching, which gives you

such joy. Desiring your welfare, O strong-armed warrior, I will tell
you more.
2 Neither gods nor sages know my origin, for I am the source from

which the gods and sages come. 3 Whoever knows me as the Lord
of all creation, without birth or beginning, knows the truth and frees
himself from all evil.
4 Discrimination, wisdom, understanding, forgiveness, truth, self-

control, and peace of mind; pleasure and pain, birth and death, fear
and courage, honor and dishonor; 5 nonviolence, charity,
equanimity, contentment, and perseverance in spiritual disciplines –
all the different qualities found in living creatures have their source
in me.
6 The seven great sages and the four ancient ancestors were born

from my mind and received my power. From them came all the
creatures of this world. 7 Whoever understands my power and the
mystery of my manifestations comes without doubt to be united
with me.
8 I am the source from which all creatures evolve. The wise

remember this and worship me with loving devotion. 9 Their
thoughts are all absorbed in me, and all their vitality flows to me.
Teaching one another, talking about me always, they are happy and
fulfilled.

10 To those steadfast in love and devotion I give spiritual wisdom, so

that they may come to me. 11 Out of compassion I destroy the
darkness of their ignorance. From within them I light the lamp of
wisdom and dispel all darkness from their lives.
ARJUNA
12 You are Brahman supreme, the highest abode, the supreme

purifier, the self-luminous, eternal spirit, first among the gods,
unborn and infinite. 13 The great sages and seers – Narada, Asita,
Devala, and Vyasa too – have acclaimed you thus; now you have
declared it to me yourself.
14 Now, O Krishna, I believe that everything you have told me is

divine truth. O Lord, neither gods nor demons know your real
nature. 15 Indeed, you alone know yourself, O supreme spirit. You
are the source of being and the master of every creature, God of
gods, the Lord of the universe.
16 Tell me all your divine attributes, leaving nothing unsaid. Tell me

of the glories with which you fill the cosmos. 17 Krishna, you are a
supreme master of yoga. Tell me how I should meditate to gain
constant awareness of you. In what things and in what ways should I
meditate on you? 18 O Krishna, you who stir up people’s hearts, tell
me in detail your attributes and your powers; I can never tire of
hearing your immortal words.
KRISHNA
19 All right, Arjuna, I will tell you of my divine powers. I will

mention only the most glorious; for there is no end to them.
20 I am the true Self in the heart of every creature, Arjuna, and the

beginning, middle, and end of their existence.
21 Among the shining gods I am Vishnu; of luminaries I am the sun;

among the storm gods I am Marichi, and in the night sky I am the
moon.

22 Among scriptures I am the Sama Veda, and among the lesser gods

I am Indra. Among the senses I am the mind, and in living beings I
am consciousness.
23 Among the Rudras I am Shankara. Among the spirits of the

natural world I am Kubera, god of wealth, and Pavaka, the purifying
fire. Among mountains I am Meru.
24 Among priests I am Brihaspati, and among military leaders I am

Skanda. Among bodies of water I am the ocean.
25 Among the great seers I am Bhrigu, and among words, the

syllable Om; I am the repetition of the holy name, and among
mountains I am the Himalayas.
26 Among trees I am the ashvattha, the sacred fig; among the

gandharvas, the heavenly musicians, I am Chitraratha. Among
divine seers I am Narada, and among sages I am Kapila.
27 I was born from the nectar of immortality as the primordial horse

and as Indra’s noble elephant. Among human beings, I am the king.
28 Among weapons I am the thunderbolt. I am Kamadhuk, the cow

that fulfills all desires; I am Kandarpa, the power of sex, and Vasuki,
the king of snakes.
29 I am Ananta, the cosmic serpent, and Varuna, the god of water; I

am Aryaman among the noble ancestors. Among the forces which
restrain I am Yama, the god of death.
30 Among animals I am the lion; among birds, the eagle Garuda. I

am Prahlada, born among the demons, and of all that measures, I am
time.
31 Among purifying forces I am the wind; among warriors, Rama.

Of water creatures I am the crocodile, and of rivers I am the Ganges.

32 I am the beginning, middle, and end of creation. Of all the

sciences I am the science of Self-knowledge, and I am logic in those
who debate. 33 Among letters I am A; among grammatical
compounds I am the dvandva. I am infinite time, and the sustainer
whose face is seen everywhere.
34 I am death, which overcomes all, and the source of all beings still

to be born. I am the feminine qualities: fame, beauty, perfect speech,
memory, intelligence, loyalty, and forgiveness.
35 Among the hymns of the Sama Veda I am the Brihat; among

poetic meters, the Gayatri. Among months I am Margashirsha, first
of the year; among seasons I am spring, that brings forth flowers.
36 I am the gambling of the gambler and the radiance in all that

shines. I am effort, I am victory, and I am the goodness of the
virtuous.
37 Among the Vrishnis I am Krishna, and among the Pandavas I am

Arjuna. Among sages I am Vyasa, and among poets, Ushanas.
38 I am the scepter which metes out punishment, and the art of

statesmanship in those who lead. I am the silence of the unknown
and the wisdom of the wise.
39 I am the seed that can be found in every creature, Arjuna; for

without me nothing can exist, neither animate nor inanimate.
40 But there is no end to my divine attributes, Arjuna; these I have

mentioned are only a few. 41 Wherever you find strength, or beauty,
or spiritual power, you may be sure that these have sprung from a
spark of my essence.
42 But of what use is it to you to know all this, Arjuna? Just

remember that I am, and that I support the entire cosmos with only a
fragment of my being.

Chapter Eleven

The Cosmic Vision
This is the most exalted chapter of the entire Gita, for here Arjuna sees the
divine vision of Krishna in his full nature as God himself, Lord of the
Universe. It is difficult to see at first why the ultimate spiritual vision
should be granted to Arjuna at this point. We must remember that Krishna
and Arjuna have been companions for many lives. Yet at the opening of the
Gita, Arjuna is a warrior, little concerned with mystic visions. Step by step
Krishna has led him to an understanding of the real purpose of his life – to
know who he is and to know also who Krishna is. In the last chapter,
Krishna had reached the point where he was willing to reveal to Arjuna the
manifestations of divine power. Arjuna had not only asked about those
powers, but had even wanted to know in which forms he might meditate on
Krishna – the first time Arjuna had spoken of contemplation.
Now, in chapter 11, Arjuna asks to see Krishna as He really is. His desire
is granted, and in essence the rest of the chapter describes Arjuna’s
samadhi. Samadhi is the word used by Patanjali in his classic work, the
Yoga Sutras, to describe the final stage in meditation, in which the mind is
completely concentrated and a superconscious mode of knowing comes into
play. Patanjali speaks of many different kinds of samadhi, but for practical
purposes we may speak of two: savikalpa and nirvikalpa. Arjuna’s vision
begins with savikalpa samadhi, in which he sees God in a personal
manifestation. Then, as he passes into nirvikalpa samadhi, Arjuna sees all
forms disappearing into God, until only a supernatural fire consuming the
entire phenomenal world is left.
This supreme vision dazzles Arjuna with the blinding splendor of a
thousand suns. Mystics have often described their experiences in terms of
light. In an ancient prayer of the Veda, the poet asks for divine wisdom to
dawn in his heart just as the sun rises in the sky. And in the West we have
countless testimonies like that of St. Teresa of Avila:
When the soul looks upon this Divine Sun, the brightness dazzles it. . . .
And very often it remains completely blind, absorbed, amazed, and
dazzled by all the wonders it sees.

As this vision begins to unfold, Arjuna sees the whole world in the body
of Krishna and he begins a hymn of praise. He sees Krishna as Vishnu with
his traditional weapons, the mace and the discus, and wearing a crown.
As the vision becomes more intense, Arjuna begins to feel afraid. He sees
the light of God become a fire that burns to consume all things, as if at the
end of time. All the warriors on the battlefield are mortals, and Arjuna sees
them slain, burning in the universal fire. All creatures rush to destruction
like moths into a flame. God’s radiance is both a great light and a burning
fire.
Terrified, Arjuna wants to know the identity of this awesome God, who
bears no resemblance now to the Krishna he had known as his teacher and
friend. In answer to the question, “Who are you?” Krishna’s reply is the
verse (11:32) that burst into Robert Oppenheimer’s mind when he saw the
atomic bomb explode over Trinity in the summer of 1945: “I am become
Death, the shatterer of worlds. . . .” But the word kala means not just death
but time, which eventually devours all.
Arjuna is brave, and worthy of this vision, for he does not lose
consciousness or completely break down. He praises Krishna and then asks
for forgiveness if during their long friendship he has ever said or done
anything to offend the Lord through mistaking him for a mere human being.
Finally, the vision is too much for Arjuna. Though he experiences the deep
peace and joy of samadhi, he is terrified at the same time. He wishes to see
the more human face of God.
Krishna grants his desire and returns to his gentle, normal aspect. He tells
Arjuna how very difficult it is to see him in his exalted form as the Lord of
Yoga, the God of gods. Only pure devotion attains this vision. This theme
dominates the remaining chapters of the Gita: it is devotion that is allimportant on the spiritual quest. – D.M.

11: The Cosmic Vision
ARJUNA
1 Out of compassion you have taught me the supreme mystery of the

Self. Through your words my delusion is gone. 2 You have
explained the origin and end of every creature, O lotus-eyed one,
and told me of your own supreme, limitless existence.
3 Just as you have described your infinite glory, O Lord, now I long

to see it. I want to see you as the supreme ruler of creation. 4 O
Lord, master of yoga, if you think me strong enough to behold it,
show me your immortal Self.
KRISHNA
5 Behold, Arjuna, a million divine forms, with an infinite variety of

color and shape. 6 Behold the gods of the natural world, and many
more wonders never revealed before. 7 Behold the entire cosmos
turning within my body, and the other things you desire to see.
8 But these things cannot be seen with your physical eyes; therefore

I give you spiritual vision to perceive my majestic power.
SANJAYA
9 Having spoken these words, Krishna, the master of yoga, revealed

to Arjuna his most exalted, lordly form.
10 He appeared with an infinite number of faces, ornamented by

heavenly jewels, displaying unending miracles and the countless
weapons of his power. 11 Clothed in celestial garments and covered
with garlands, sweet-smelling with heavenly fragrances, he showed

himself as the infinite Lord, the source of all wonders, whose face is
everywhere.
12 If a thousand suns were to rise in the heavens at the same time,

the blaze of their light would resemble the splendor of that supreme
spirit.
13 There, within the body of the God of gods, Arjuna saw all the

manifold forms of the universe united as one. 14 Filled with
amazement, his hair standing on end in ecstasy, he bowed before the
Lord with joined palms and spoke these words.
ARJUNA
15 O Lord, I see within your body all the gods and every kind of

living creature. I see Brahma, the Creator, seated on a lotus; I see
the ancient sages and the celestial serpents.
16 I see infinite mouths and arms, stomachs and eyes, and you are

embodied in every form. I see you everywhere, without beginning,
middle, or end. You are the Lord of all creation, and the cosmos is
your body.
17 You wear a crown and carry a mace and discus; your radiance is

blinding and immeasurable. I see you, who are so difficult to
behold, shining like a fiery sun blazing in every direction.
18 You are the supreme, changeless Reality, the one thing to be

known. You are the refuge of all creation, the immortal spirit, the
eternal guardian of eternal dharma.
19 You are without beginning, middle, or end; you touch everything

with your infinite power. The sun and moon are your eyes, and your
mouth is fire; your radiance warms the cosmos.
20 O Lord, your presence fills the heavens and the earth and reaches

in every direction. I see the three worlds trembling before this vision
of your wonderful and terrible form.

21 The gods enter your being, some calling out and greeting you in

fear. Great saints sing your glory, praying, “May all be well!”
22 The multitudes of gods, demigods, and demons are all

overwhelmed by the sight of you. 23 O mighty Lord, at the sight of
your myriad eyes and mouths, arms and legs, stomachs and fearful
teeth, I and the entire universe shake in terror.
24 O Vishnu, I can see your eyes shining; with open mouth, you

glitter in an array of colors, and your body touches the sky. I look at
you and my heart trembles; I have lost all courage and all peace of
mind.
25 When I see your mouths with their fearful teeth, mouths burning

like the fires at the end of time, I forget where I am and I have no
place to go. O Lord, you are the support of the universe; have mercy
on me!
26 I see all the sons of Dhritarashtra; I see Bhishma, Drona, and

Karna; I see our warriors and all the kings who are here to fight. 27
All are rushing into your awful jaws; I see some of them crushed by
your teeth. 28 As rivers flow into the ocean, all the warriors of this
world are passing into your fiery jaws; 29 all creatures rush to their
destruction like moths into a flame.
30 You lap the worlds into your burning mouths and swallow them.

Filled with your terrible radiance, O Vishnu, the whole of creation
bursts into flames.
31 Tell me who you are, O Lord of terrible form. I bow before you;

have mercy! I want to know who you are, you who existed before
all creation. Your nature and workings confound me.
KRISHNA
32 I am time, the destroyer of all; I have come to consume the world.

Even without your participation, all the warriors gathered here will
die.

33 Therefore arise, Arjuna; conquer your enemies and enjoy the

glory of sovereignty. I have already slain all these warriors; you will
only be my instrument.
34 Bhishma, Drona, Jayadratha, Karna, and many others are already

slain. Kill those whom I have killed. Do not hesitate. Fight in this
battle and you will conquer your enemies.
SANJAYA
35 Having heard these words, Arjuna trembled in fear. With joined

palms he bowed before Krishna and addressed him stammering.
ARJUNA
36 O Krishna, it is right that the world delights and rejoices in your

praise, that all the saints and sages bow down to you and all evil
flees before you to the far corners of the universe.
37 How could they not worship you, O Lord? You are the eternal

spirit, who existed before Brahma the Creator and who will never
cease to be. Lord of the gods, you are the abode of the universe.
Changeless, you are what is and what is not, and beyond the duality
of existence and nonexistence.
38 You are the first among the gods, the timeless spirit, the resting

place of all beings. You are the knower and the thing which is
known. You are the final home; with your infinite form you pervade
the cosmos.
39 You are Vayu, god of wind; Yama, god of death; Agni, god of

fire; Varuna, god of water. You are the moon and the creator
Prajapati, and the great-grandfather of all creatures. I bow before
you and salute you again and again.
40 You are behind me and in front of me; I bow to you on every side.

Your power is immeasurable. You pervade everything; you are
everything.

41 Sometimes, because we were friends, I rashly said, “Oh, Krishna!

Say, friend!” – casual, careless remarks. Whatever I may have said
lightly, whether we were playing or resting, alone or in company,
sitting together or eating, 42 if it was disrespectful, forgive me for it,
O Krishna. I did not know the greatness of your nature, unchanging
and imperishable.
43 You are the father of the universe, of the animate and the

inanimate; you are the object of all worship, the greatest guru. There
is none to equal you in the three worlds. Who can match your
power? 44 O gracious Lord, I prostrate myself before you and ask
for your blessing. As a father forgives his son, or a friend a friend,
or a lover his beloved, so should you forgive me.
45 I rejoice in seeing you as you have never been seen before, yet I

am filled with fear by this vision of you as the abode of the
universe. Please let me see you again as the shining God of gods. 46
Though you are the embodiment of all creation, let me see you
again not with a thousand arms but with four, carrying the mace and
discus and wearing a crown.
KRISHNA
47 Arjuna, through my grace you have been united with me and

received this vision of my radiant, universal form, without
beginning or end, which no one else has ever seen.
48 Not by knowledge of the Vedas, nor sacrifice, nor charity, nor

rituals, nor even by severe asceticism has any other mortal seen
what you have seen, O heroic Arjuna.
49 Do not be troubled; do not fear my terrible form. Let your heart

be satisfied and your fears dispelled in looking at me as I was
before.
SANJAYA
50 Having spoken these words, the Lord once again assumed the

gentle form of Krishna and consoled his devotee, who had been so

afraid.
ARJUNA
51 O Krishna, now that I have seen your gentle human form my

mind is again composed and returned to normal.
KRISHNA
52 It is extremely difficult to obtain the vision you have had; even

the gods long always to see me in this aspect. 53 Neither knowledge
of the Vedas, nor austerity, nor charity, nor sacrifice can bring the
vision you have seen. 54 But through unfailing devotion, Arjuna,
you can know me, see me, and attain union with me. 55 Those who
make me the supreme goal of all their work and act without selfish
attachment, who devote themselves to me completely and are free
from ill will for any creature, enter into me.

Chapter Twelve

The Way of Love
This short chapter focuses upon the supreme importance of devotion and
faith in spiritual development. Here love, or personal devotion, is the most
powerful motivation in spiritual life.
The world’s great religions agree on this point. All religions allow for a
way of devotion, and millions of men and women have found spiritual
fulfillment in devotion to Christ, the Buddha, or Muhammad. Hinduism has
allowed a place for the path of knowledge as well as the path of devotion;
here, however, the Gita stresses the efficacy of devotion.
The Upanishads, the final word on mystic experience uttered by the
Vedas, stressed the ultimate reality, the eternal truth behind the ephemeral
things of this world. The teachers of the Upanishads told their students to
seek knowledge of the Atman, their true Self. The consummation of this
knowledge was to know that the Self within was one with Brahman, the
ultimate reality pervading all things. This was encapsulated in the statement
Tat tvam asi, “You are that” – that imperishable being, that immortal
Reality. Brahman, the nameless, formless Godhead, could be known only in
the superconscious state.
The Gita moves away from such an approach to religion. For as Krishna
says, seeking an eternal, indefinable, hidden Godhead is rather a tall order
for the average (or even above average) person. In fact, in this chapter it is
said to be beyond the reach of practically all “embodied beings” (dehavat,
“those who have bodies”). This path of wisdom may be just too “spiritual”
for earth’s children, because those who identify to a large degree with their
physical nature find the way of knowledge too steep a climb. We can turn to
one of the Western followers of this path to see why; this is Dionysius the
Areopagite, a Christian monk of the fifth century, sounding remarkably like
verses 3–4 of this very chapter:
Then, beyond all distinction between knower and known, the aspirant
becomes merged in the nameless, formless Reality, wholly absorbed in
That which is beyond all things and in nothing else. . . . Having stilled

his intellect and mind, he is united by his highest faculty with That
which is beyond all knowing.
Fortunately there is the path of love; for when God is loved in personal
aspect, the way is vastly easier. According to the Hindu scriptures, God can
be loved as a merciful father, a divine mother, a wise friend, a passionate
beloved, or even as a mischievous child.
We might turn to the Christian mystics for help here, for most of them
have walked the way of love. The medieval Christian work called The
Cloud of Unknowing states that love is the sure, safe path to God: “By love
He can be gotten and holden, by thought never.” In a well-known passage in
the New Testament, St. Paul puts love above knowledge and even above
miraculous powers: “But I shall give you a more excellent way. . . . Love
never faileth. But whether there be prophecies, they shall fail. Whether
there be tongues, they shall cease. Whether there be knowledge, it shall
vanish away.” And St. John of the Cross tells concisely why the vast
majority of human beings find it easier to overcome their weaknesses
through love than through knowledge:
In order to overcome our desires and to renounce all those things, our
love and inclination for which are wont to inflame the will that it
delights therein, we require a more ardent fire and a nobler love – that
of the Bridegroom. . . . if our spiritual nature were not on fire with other
and nobler passions, we should never cast off the yoke of the senses.
But such love is often not forthcoming in the struggling soul, even in one
like Arjuna. So Krishna says that if Arjuna is not able to focus his devotion,
he should learn to do so through the regular practice of meditation. Even
love and devotion can be cultivated through regular practice; they needn’t
be regarded as mysterious forces, divine gifts of the spirit.
If even the attempt at regular practice should fail, Krishna is still not
ready to let Arjuna admit defeat. He should, Krishna says, work selflessly
without desire for the fruits of his labors. But real peace of mind comes
only from renunciation. The word tyaga here seems to mean renunciation or
abandonment of self-will more than anything else. Such self-surrender may
be a last resort, but if it is genuine it brings immediate peace.

Verses 13–20 describe the characteristics of the genuine lover of God.
Such a saintly person, Krishna points out, is greatly loved and dear to
Krishna himself. –D.M.

12: The Way of Love
ARJUNA
1 Of those steadfast devotees who love you and those who seek you

as the eternal formless Reality, who are the more established in
yoga?
KRISHNA
2 Those who set their hearts on me and worship me with unfailing

devotion and faith are more established in yoga.
3 As for those who seek the transcendental Reality, without name,

without form, contemplating the Unmanifested, beyond the reach of
thought and of feeling, 4 with their senses subdued and mind serene
and striving for the good of all beings, they too will verily come
unto me.
5 Yet hazardous and slow is the path to the Unrevealed, difficult for

physical creatures to tread. 6 But they for whom I am the supreme
goal, who do all work renouncing self for me and meditate on me
with single-hearted devotion, 7 these I will swiftly rescue from the
fragment’s cycle of birth and death, for their consciousness has
entered into me.
8 Still your mind in me, still your intellect in me, and without doubt

you will be united with me forever. 9 If you cannot still your mind in
me, learn to do so through the regular practice of meditation. 10 If
you lack the will for such self-discipline, engage yourself in my
work, for selfless service can lead you at last to complete
fulfillment. 11 If you are unable to do even this, surrender yourself to

me, disciplining yourself and renouncing the results of all your
actions.
12 Better indeed is knowledge than mechanical practice. Better than

knowledge is meditation. But better still is surrender of attachment
to results, because there follows immediate peace.
13 That one I love who is incapable of ill will, who is friendly and

compassionate. Living beyond the reach of “I” and “mine” and of
pleasure and pain, 14 patient, contented, self-controlled, firm in
faith, with all their heart and all their mind given to me – with such
as these I am in love.
15 Not agitating the world or by it agitated, they stand above the

sway of elation, competition, and fear: that one is my beloved.
16 They are detached, pure, efficient, impartial, never anxious,

selfless in all their undertakings; they are my devotees, very dear to
me.
17 That one is dear to me who runs not after the pleasant or away

from the painful, grieves not, lusts not, but lets things come and go
as they happen.
18 That devotee who looks upon friend and foe with equal regard,

who is not buoyed up by praise nor cast down by blame, alike in
heat and cold, pleasure and pain, free from selfish attachments, 19
the same in honor and dishonor, quiet, ever full, in harmony
everywhere, firm in faith – such a one is dear to me.
20 Those who meditate upon this immortal dharma as I have

declared it, full of faith and seeking me as life’s supreme goal, are
truly my devotees, and my love for them is very great.

Chapter Thirteen

The Field & the Knower
This chapter presents us with two sweeping categories: the “field” and the
“knower of the field.” To simplify, we may think of the field as the body
and the knower of the field as the Self that resides in the body. This chapter,
then, is about the duality between “soul and body.” This duality is seen as
eternal, a basic division of all things – a fundamental concept elaborated in
Sankhya philosophy.
We said that the “field” is the body, but this is not precise enough. The
field also includes the mind: in fact, it comprises all the components of
prakriti including ahamkara – the awareness each of us has that we are an
individual ego, from aham “I” and kara “maker.” Ahamkara is the basic
awareness of separateness: that which makes me “I,” a being separate from
the rest of creation. In this wide sense the field encompasses everything,
except for the elusive consciousness that “knows” the field. The field is the
object; the knower is the subject. Krishna is the hidden knower of the field:
that is, the Self.
This term “field” is a surprisingly modern one, for it describes what
today we might call an extension of the continuum of mass, energy, time,
and space to include the strata of mind as well – in other words, a field of
forces both physical and mental. Just as physics no longer regards matter
and energy as essentially separate, the Gita would not regard matter and
mind as separate; they are different aspects of prakriti, the underlying
“stuff” of existence.
Another dimension of Krishna’s use of the word “field” is brought out by
a traditional Hindu anecdote. A wandering sadhu or holy man is asked what
his work in life is; he replies, “I’m a farmer.” When the questioner looks
surprised he adds, “This body of mine is my field. I sow good thoughts and
actions, and in my body I reap the results.” The Buddha explains, “All that
we are is the result of what we have thought: it is founded on our thoughts;
it is made of our thoughts.” What we think, we become, for as Emerson
says, the ancestor of every action is a thought. Thus our thoughts, taken
together, bear fruit in the actions, decisions, and desires that shape our lives.
In part, the body bears the fruit of what we think insofar as our way of

thinking affects our health and safety. But in a larger sense, the whole field
of human activity (indeed the whole of prakriti) is also a “field of karma” –
where, for example, the global environment is shaped by the sum of what
its inhabitants do, which in turn is shaped by how they think. This idea will
be picked up and elaborated on in detail in the concluding chapters of the
Gita.
Verses 7–11 then describe the person who understands his or her own
true nature. This is an attractive picture of the modest, truly wise person
who is in control of his or her own life. One implication of these verses is
that it is quite an achievement to understand the difference between the field
and the Self, the knower. Most people confuse the two, taking the body and
mind to be who they are. In the usual course of events, we may be totally
unaware that there is a Self, a consciousness underneath the surface
awareness of a separate “I.” Verses 12–17 describe the ultimate underlying
reality: Brahman, pure, undifferentiated consciousness, the divine ground of
existence.
Verse 19 returns us to the discussion of the basic duality of mind/matter
and spirit (Self). Again the technical terms prakriti and Purusha are used.
Purusha is the knower and prakriti the field. From the union of these two all
things are born. Both prakriti and Purusha are essential to the creation of the
world: nothing could exist without the spiritual basis of Purusha, and
nothing could develop in a manifest form without the mind and matter of
prakriti.
With its need to think of abstract principles in human terms, Hinduism
embodies these two eternal principles in the figures of Shiva and Shakti, the
divine Father and Mother. The Gita does not mention these two because it
comes essentially from the Vishnu tradition, but in the other great stream of
the Hindu faith, Shiva is the eternal Spirit, the Absolute, represented as
dwelling aloof on the mountain peak of spiritual peace. Shakti, the Divine
Mother, is his creative partner, and without her, Shiva could never have
created the world. Shakti – she has many names in her various
manifestations – rules in the realm of birth and death; Shiva, Purusha, lives
in the realm of the immortal. Together the two represent Brahman, the
attributeless Godhead, and the creative power of the Godhead called maya.
Thus it is in the union of Shiva and Shakti that all things are born.
This chapter emphasizes that the Self, the real knower, is ever uninvolved
in the shifting forces that play over the field. There is no possibility of any

soul being eternally lost, for all beings partake of the immortal, pure nature
of Purusha. We may endure countless eons of birth and death, but we must
finally find our rest in the eternal spirit. By definition, nothing taking place
in the realm of prakriti can affect Purusha; but the exact nature of the
interaction of these two is a profound mystery.
Verse 32 explains this mystery by drawing a comparison with akasha, the
subtlest element recognized by the ancient philosophers. Akasha is space
itself. Just as space pervades the cosmos, yet remains pure even in the midst
of impure things, so the Self remains completely pure, even though it
dwells in all things. Though it seems to live in the land of mortals and to
undergo change and death, the real knower in every creature is deathless,
“hidden in the heart.” –D.M.

13: The Field & the Knower
KRISHNA
1 The body is called a field, Arjuna; the one who knows it is called

the Knower of the field. This is the knowledge of those who know. 2
I am the Knower of the field in everyone, Arjuna. Knowledge of the
field and its Knower is true knowledge.
3 Listen and I will explain the nature of the field and how change

takes place within it. I will also describe the Knower of the field and
his power. 4 These truths have been sung by great sages in a variety
of ways, and expounded in precise arguments concerning Brahman.
5 The field, Arjuna, is made up of the following: the five areas of

sense perception; the five elements; the five sense organs and the
five organs of action; the three components of the mind: manas,
buddhi, and ahamkara; and the undifferentiated energy from which
all these evolved. 6 In this field arise desire and aversion, pleasure
and pain, the body, intelligence, and will.
7 Those who know truly are free from pride and deceit. They are

gentle, forgiving, upright, and pure, devoted to their spiritual
teacher, filled with inner strength, and self-controlled. 8 Detached
from sense objects and self-will, they have learned the painful
lesson of separate birth and suffering, old age, disease, and death.
9 Free from selfish attachment, they do not get compulsively

entangled even in home and family. They are even-minded through
good fortune and bad. 10 Their devotion to me is undivided.
Enjoying solitude and not following the crowd, they seek only me.

11 This is true knowledge, to seek the Self as the true end of wisdom

always. To seek anything else is ignorance.
12 I will tell you of the wisdom that leads to immortality: the

beginningless Brahman, which can be called neither being nor nonbeing.
13 It dwells in all, in every hand and foot and head, in every mouth

and eye and ear in the universe. 14 Without senses itself, it shines
through the functioning of the senses. Completely independent, it
supports all things. Beyond the gunas, it enjoys their play.
15 It is both near and far, both within and without every creature; it

moves and is unmoving. 16 In its subtlety it is beyond
comprehension. It is indivisible, yet appears divided in separate
creatures. Know it to be the creator, the preserver, and the destroyer.
17 Dwelling in every heart, it is beyond darkness. It is called the

light of light, the object and goal of knowledge, and knowledge
itself.
18 I have revealed to you the nature of the field and the meaning and

object of true knowledge. Those who are devoted to me, knowing
these things, are united with me.
19 Know that prakriti and Purusha are both without beginning, and

that from prakriti come the gunas and all that changes. 20 Prakriti is
the agent, cause, and effect of every action, but it is Purusha that
seems to experience pleasure and pain.
21 Purusha, resting in prakriti, witnesses the play of the gunas born

of prakriti. But attachment to the gunas leads a person to be born for
good or evil.
22 Within the body the supreme Purusha is called the witness,

approver, supporter, enjoyer, the supreme Lord, the highest Self.

23 Whoever realizes the true nature of Purusha, prakriti, and the

gunas, whatever path he or she may follow, is not born separate
again.
24 Some realize the Self within them through the practice of

meditation, some by the path of wisdom, and others by selfless
service. 25 Others may not know these paths; but hearing and
following the instructions of an illumined teacher, they too go
beyond death.
26 Whatever exists, Arjuna, animate or inanimate, is born through

the union of the field and its Knower.
27 They alone see truly who see the Lord the same in every creature,

who see the deathless in the hearts of all that die. 28 Seeing the same
Lord everywhere, they do not harm themselves or others. Thus they
attain the supreme goal.
29 They alone see truly who see that all actions are performed by

prakriti, while the Self remains unmoved. 30 When they see the
variety of creation rooted in that unity and growing out of it, they
attain fulfillment in Brahman.
31 This supreme Self is without a beginning, undifferentiated,

deathless. Though it dwells in the body, Arjuna, it neither acts nor is
touched by action. 32 As akasha pervades the cosmos but remains
unstained, the Self can never be tainted though it dwells in every
creature.
33 As the sun lights up the world, the Self dwelling in the field is the

source of all light in the field. 34 Those who, with the eye of
wisdom, distinguish the field from its Knower and the way to
freedom from the bondage of prakriti, attain the supreme goal.

Chapter Fourteen

The Forces of Evolution
The last chapter gave us the distinction between Purusha and prakriti. This
chapter will tell us in more detail about the nature of prakriti – the basis of
the world of mind and matter. Here the Gita explains human experience in
terms of the three qualities of prakriti, known as gunas: sattva, rajas, and
tamas. When the soul attains illumination it goes beyond the confines of
prakriti into the spiritual realm of Purusha. But until then, the soul must
learn to deal with these three all-powerful forces.
No single English word can be given to translate the words sattva, rajas,
and tamas. The quality of sattva combines goodness, purity, light, harmony,
balance. In terms of evolution, sattva is on the highest level. Rajas is energy
– or, on the human level, passion – which can be both good and bad. In
personality rajas may express itself in anger, hatred, or greed; but it also
provides motivation, the will to act. Rajas is ambitious, which is not
altogether a bad thing for the evolution of the soul. It is definitely superior
to the third guna, tamas, which combines inertia, sloth, darkness, ignorance,
insensitivity. This is the lowest state in terms of evolution; for tamas means
a dead stability, where nothing much happens for good or ill. Worse, tamas
can mean not just stability but a sliding backwards in the struggle of
evolution, where to stand still may mean to be left behind (14:18).
In any given personality or phenomenon all the three gunas are likely to
be present. It is the mix of the three that colors our experience. Sattva may
be dominant, with an admixture of rajas or tamas. Or perhaps rajas
dominates, with a little sattva and a good measure of tamas. Finally, the
personality may be basically tamasic, with a few rays of the light of sattva
and a little of the heat of rajas. In any case, no mix of the three gunas is
stable, for it is the very nature of prakriti to be in constant flux. The gunas
are constantly shifting, always changing in intensity.
It is essential that the gunas, even the purity and goodness of sattva, be
transcended if the soul is to attain its final release. For the three gunas are
forces that operate within the world of prakriti: in fact, their three strands
make up the whole fabric of the phenomenal world. Liberation lies beyond
the conditioning of prakriti, in the realm of Purusha. When Arjuna asks

Krishna to describe the person who has gone beyond prakriti’s net, Krishna
replies that such a person is detached from the constant shifting and
interaction of the gunas. Identified with the Self, he or she realizes that the
gunas and their play are external – even the emotions and thoughts that
seem so personal, so interior, are really only the play of prakriti. Thoughts
and emotions, and ahamkara itself, stop at the gate of the inner Self. The
Self abides in the inner chamber of the heart, always at peace, whatever
forces of prakriti may storm outside. The illumined man or woman
maintains a joyful evenness of mind in happiness and sorrow.
At the end of the chapter, again reminding him of the power of devotion
(bhakti), Krishna says that Arjuna can transcend the gunas through steadfast
love. If he has devotion and has gone beyond the three gunas, then he will
be fit to know Brahman. –D.M.

14: Forces of Evolution
KRISHNA
1 Let me tell you more about the wisdom that transcends all

knowledge, through which the saints and sages attained perfection. 2
Those who rely on this wisdom will be united with me. For them
there is neither rebirth nor fear of death.
3 My womb is prakriti; in that I place the seed. Thus all created

things are born. 4 Everything born, Arjuna, comes from the womb of
prakriti, and I am the seed-giving father.
5 It is the three gunas born of prakriti – sattva, rajas, and tamas –

that bind the immortal Self to the body. 6 Sattva – pure, luminous,
and free from sorrow – binds us with attachment to happiness and
wisdom. 7 Rajas is passion, arising from selfish desire and
attachment. These bind the Self with compulsive action. 8 Tamas,
born of ignorance, deludes all creatures through heedlessness,
indolence, and sleep.
9 Sattva binds us to happiness; rajas binds us to action. Tamas,

distorting our understanding, binds us to delusion.
10 Sattva predominates when rajas and tamas are transformed. Rajas

prevails when sattva is weak and tamas overcome. Tamas prevails
when rajas and sattva are dormant.
11 When sattva predominates, the light of wisdom shines through

every gate of the body. 12 When rajas predominates, a person runs
about pursuing selfish and greedy ends, driven by restlessness and

desire. 13 When tamas is dominant a person lives in darkness –
slothful, confused, and easily infatuated.
14 Those dying in the state of sattva attain the pure worlds of the

wise. 15 Those dying in rajas are reborn among people driven by
work. But those who die in tamas are conceived in the wombs of the
ignorant.
16 The fruit of good deeds is pure and sattvic. The fruit of rajas is

suffering. The fruit of tamas is ignorance and insensitivity.
17 From sattva comes understanding; from rajas, greed. But the

outcome of tamas is confusion, infatuation, and ignorance.
18 Those who live in sattva go upwards; those in rajas remain where

they are. But those immersed in tamas sink downwards.
19 The wise see clearly that all action is the work of the gunas.

Knowing that which is above the gunas, they enter into union with
me.
20 Going beyond the three gunas which form the body, they leave

behind the cycle of birth and death, decrepitude and sorrow, and
attain to immortality.
ARJUNA
21 What are the characteristics of those who have gone beyond the

gunas, O Lord? How do they act? How have they passed beyond the
gunas’ hold?
KRISHNA
22 They are unmoved by the harmony of sattva, the activity of rajas,

or the delusion of tamas. They feel no aversion when these forces
are active, nor do they crave for them when these forces subside.
23 They remain impartial, undisturbed by the actions of the gunas.

Knowing that it is the gunas which act, they abide within

themselves and do not vacillate.
24 Established within themselves, they are equal in pleasure and

pain, praise and blame, kindness and unkindness. Clay, a rock, and
gold are the same to them. 25 Alike in honor and dishonor, alike to
friend and foe, they have given up every selfish pursuit. Such are
those who have gone beyond the gunas.
26 By serving me with steadfast love, a man or woman goes beyond

the gunas. Such a one is fit for union with Brahman. 27 For I am the
support of Brahman, the eternal, the unchanging, the deathless, the
everlasting dharma, the source of all joy.

Chapter Fifteen

The Supreme Self
This is a difficult chapter, for it deals essentially with questions of theology
and ultimate mystical experience.
Krishna reveals that he transcends not only the world of matter but also
the immortal Atman that dwells as the conscious “knower” within all
beings. Krishna has said that he is the Atman; but the paradox is that he also
transcends the Atman. In this highest aspect Krishna is Ishvara, the cosmic
Lord, who abides in his own mystery. The liberated Self enjoys union with
Krishna and lives in Krishna’s highest home. But the Self does not become
Krishna: the immortal soul, even when liberated from its mortal journeying,
does not become God.
The chapter opens with the image of an upside-down tree, a world-tree
rooted in Brahman which branches out into a manifold creation in this
realm below. This is said to be an ashvattha or pipal tree, a kind of fig. Like
the banyan, it sends out roots into the air, spreading above and below.
In this chapter about Krishna’s most exalted nature, it is appropriate that
his “home,” the highest goal of all, is described. It is an abode of light and
eternal life. By its very nature, it is beyond the description of human
language. Verse 4 uses an elemental and ancient word for the ultimate
reality that defies all description, all human thought: Tat, which means
simply “that” or “it.” Here the Gita personalizes Tat to the extent of giving
It a home: avyayam padam, the immortal home, the eternal goal. Pada also
means foot or step, and it is of interest here to recall a myth from the Vedas.
At the beginning of time Vishnu took three steps that measured out the
entire cosmos. The third and highest step became a heavenly world, the
realm of the blessed. In the Rig Veda (I.154.5), the poet longs to find
himself in this home of the god:
May I go to his blessed world
Where those who love the gods rejoice;
For there, truly, is the company of the far-stepping god,
A fountain of honey in the highest step of Vishnu.

The Gita describes Krishna’s home as a realm of light beyond the light of
the sun (15:6). Here we might compare the Gita with the Katha Upanishad
(5:15):
There shines not the sun, neither moon nor star,
Nor flash of lightning, nor fire lit on earth.
The Self is the light reflected by all.
He shining, everything shines after him.
Even here, though, we are reminded that Krishna lives not just in this
highest realm but also in the world below, where both darkness and light
coexist. In his divine mystery he sends fragments of himself to become the
inner Self in each creature. In this sense the Self enters the body at
conception, dwells in the body, and then departs at death. Krishna is the
prana – the breath or vitality – of the body. The Upanishads speak of five
pranas; here the Gita mentions the two most prominent: the prana by which
we breathe and the prana that digests food. –D.M.

15: The Supreme Self
KRISHNA
1 Sages speak of the immutable ashvattha tree, with its taproot

above and its branches below. On this tree grow the scriptures;
seeing their source, one knows their essence.
2 Nourished by the gunas, the limbs of this tree spread above and

below. Sense objects grow on the limbs as buds; the roots hanging
down bind us to action in this world.
3 The true form of this tree – its essence, beginning, and end – is not

perceived on this earth. Cut down this strong-rooted tree with the
sharp ax of detachment; 4 then find the path which does not come
back again. Seek That, the First Cause, from which the universe
came long ago.
5 Not deluded by pride, free from selfish attachment and selfish

desire, beyond the duality of pleasure and pain, ever aware of the
Self, the wise go forward to that eternal goal. 6 Neither the sun nor
the moon nor fire can add to that light. This is my supreme abode,
and those who enter there do not return to separate existence.
7 An eternal part of me enters into the world, assuming the powers

of action and perception and a mind made of prakriti. 8 When the
divine Self enters and leaves a body, it takes these along as the wind
carries a scent from place to place. 9 Using the mind, ears, eyes,
nose, and the senses of taste and touch, the Self enjoys sense
objects.

10 The deluded do not see the Self when it leaves the body or when

it dwells within it. They do not see the Self enjoying sense objects
or acting through the gunas. But they who have the eye of wisdom
see.
11 Those who strive resolutely on the path of yoga see the Self

within. The thoughtless, who strive imperfectly, do not.
12 The brightness of the sun, which lights up the world, the

brightness of the moon and of fire – these are my glory. 13 With a
drop of my energy I enter the earth and support all creatures.
Through the moon, the vessel of life-giving fluid, I nourish all
plants. 14 I enter breathing creatures and dwell within as the lifegiving breath. I am the fire in the stomach which digests all food.
15 Entering into every heart, I give the power to remember and

understand; it is I again who take that power away. All the scriptures
lead to me; I am their author and their wisdom.
16 In this world there are two orders of being: the perishable,

separate creature and the changeless spirit. 17 But beyond these
there is another, the supreme Self, the eternal Lord, who enters into
the entire cosmos and supports it from within.
18 I am that supreme Self, praised by the scriptures as beyond the

changing and the changeless. 19 Those who see in me that supreme
Self see truly. They have found the source of all wisdom, Arjuna,
and they worship me with all their heart.
20 I have shared this profound truth with you, Arjuna. Those who

understand it will attain wisdom; they will have done that which has
to be done.

Chapter Sixteen

Two Paths
In this most unusual chapter, the Gita departs from a lofty view of human
nature and describes two opposing forces. The higher tendency, the divine,
leads to increasing happiness in the course of the soul’s evolution, and
eventually to its liberation; but there is also a downward current leading to
suffering and enslavement of the spirit. This chapter is unusual in giving
equal, if not in fact more, attention to this dark side of human nature. Here
we get a detailed description of the divine qualities that liberate and the
“demonic” qualities that enslave (16:5).
In a rare somber tone, Krishna describes the sinful person, the individual
of a demonic kind – and it seems he knows what he is talking about. But
first he assures Arjuna that he is of the divine type, so he shouldn’t be
alarmed.
The “demonic” personality is basically atheistic. For such people life
does not originate in God or a divine reality but is grounded in biology, in
sexual desire. Taking a low view of human nature, such people cause
suffering to themselves as well as others. They are arrogant and have many
insatiable selfish desires, and they do not hesitate to do anything that will
get them what they want. Krishna grants that they may attain their desires,
enjoying wealth and power, but their destination is hell – a hell of their own
making, often in this very life, as their karma bears fruit.
One of the least likable characteristics of “demonic” personalities is their
sense of self-importance. They like to give gifts ostentatiously and offer
ritual sacrifices; this legitimizes their wealth and makes them feel
respectable and esteemed. They like being generous if it will make them
look good.
Krishna does not disguise his aversion to cruel people. He tells Arjuna
that he arranges for them to be born again and again in a harsh world. Such
souls cannot seem to purify their sinful hearts; repeating the same selfish
ways, they sink lower and lower. This is a bleak picture, which the Gita
dwells on only in this chapter. But even here, amidst the gloom, Krishna
will not say that such a soul is eternally damned. It may be that such a sinful
creature is condemned to birth after birth in harsh, unfavorable

circumstances, sinking into more and more hellish states of mind; but the
cycle goes on, the choice to change direction is always open, and the Atman
itself can never be stained.
Lust, anger, and greed are the three doors to hell that Arjuna must at all
costs not enter. The person who enters will not only fail to reach life’s final
goal, but will not achieve any measure of lasting happiness and prosperity.
In Sanskrit this chapter is called the “Way of Divine and Demonic
Destinies.” The words deva, god, and asura, demon, are not to be taken too
literally here. The Hindu scriptures often tell stories of the battles between
the gods and the demons; thus they dramatize the struggle between good
and evil in the world. No divine character from Hindu myth escapes a
challenge from some demon. Usually the god or goddess is victorious; but
often the demon will win a battle or two, though not the final victory.
Krishna has a long battle record, celebrated by epithets like Madhusudana,
“slayer of the demon Madhu.” Rama, another incarnation of Vishnu, had to
confront and kill Ravana. The stories go on. The gods never seem to rest for
long: there is always a new challenge to their authority, a new source of
malignant evil to be destroyed.
The Mahabharata and the Gita do not dwell on these mythical battles.
Here the interest is more frankly human, and when Krishna discusses the
“divine” and “demonic” qualities, he speaks not of gods and demons but of
human good and evil. –D.M.

16: Two Paths
KRISHNA
1 Be fearless and pure; never waver in your determination or your

dedication to the spiritual life. Give freely. Be self-controlled,
sincere, truthful, loving, and full of the desire to serve. Realize the
truth of the scriptures; learn to be detached and to take joy in
renunciation. 2 Do not get angry or harm any living creature, but be
compassionate and gentle; show good will to all. 3 Cultivate vigor,
patience, will, purity; avoid malice and pride. Then, Arjuna, you
will achieve your divine destiny.
4 Other qualities, Arjuna, make a person more and more inhuman:

hypocrisy, arrogance, conceit, anger, cruelty, ignorance.
5 The divine qualities lead to freedom; the demonic, to bondage. But

do not grieve, Arjuna; you were born with divine attributes.
6 Some people have divine tendencies, others demonic. I have

described the divine at length, Arjuna; now listen while I describe
the demonic.
7 The demonic do things they should avoid and avoid the things they

should do. They have no sense of uprightness, purity, or truth.
8 “There is no God,” they say, “no truth, no spiritual law, no moral

order. The basis of life is sex; what else can it be?” 9 Holding such
distorted views, possessing scant discrimination, they become
enemies of the world, causing suffering and destruction.

10 Hypocritical, proud, and arrogant, living in delusion and clinging

to deluded ideas, insatiable in their desires, they pursue their
unclean ends. 11 Although burdened with fears that end only with
death, they still maintain with complete assurance, “Gratification of
lust is the highest that life can offer.”
12 Bound on all sides by scheming and anxiety, driven by anger and

greed, they amass by any means they can a hoard of money for the
satisfaction of their cravings.
13 “I got this today,” they say; “tomorrow I shall get that. This

wealth is mine, and that will be mine too. 14 I have destroyed my
enemies. I shall destroy others too! Am I not like God? I enjoy what
I want. I am successful. I am powerful. I am happy. 15 I am rich and
well-born. Who is equal to me? I will perform sacrifices and give
gifts, and rejoice in my own generosity.” This is how they go on,
deluded by ignorance. 16 Bound by their greed and entangled in a
web of delusion, whirled about by a fragmented mind, they fall into
a dark hell.
17 Self-important, obstinate, swept away by the pride of wealth, they

ostentatiously perform sacrifices without any regard for their
purpose. 18 Egotistical, violent, arrogant, lustful, angry, envious of
everyone, they abuse my presence within their own bodies and in
the bodies of others.
19 Life after life I cast those who are malicious, hateful, cruel, and

degraded into the wombs of those with similar demonic natures. 20
Birth after birth they find themselves with demonic tendencies.
Degraded in this way, Arjuna, they fail to reach me and fall lower
still.
21 There are three gates to this self-destructive hell: lust, anger, and

greed. Renounce these three. 22 Those who escape from these three
gates of darkness, Arjuna, seek what is best and attain life’s supreme
goal. 23 Others disregard the teachings of the scriptures. Driven by
selfish desire, they miss the goal of life, miss even happiness and
success.

24 Therefore let the scriptures be your guide in what to do and what

not to do. Understand their teachings; then act in accordance with
them.

Chapter Seventeen

The Power of Faith
At the end of the last chapter, Krishna told Arjuna to look to the scriptures
to guide his actions, so that he can avoid the lower road that leads
backwards to a less evolved state. Now Arjuna wants to know about those
who do not follow the orthodox way set down in the scriptures, but who
nevertheless offer some kind of worship with faith in their hearts.
In reply Krishna goes into greater detail about the three gunas – sattva,
rajas, and tamas. He also stresses the importance of shraddha or faith. This
is a difficult word. “Faith” is not an adequate translation, and the etymology
of the word is obscure; it probably has an underlying meaning of “what is
held in the heart.” We might say that our shraddha is the sum total of our
values, what we really hold to be important in our lives. Every human
being, Krishna says, is shraddhamaya,“made up of faith” – as the Bible
puts it, as we think in our heart, so we are.
Here, as elsewhere in the Gita, shraddha is a positive quality. It is good to
have faith; yet faith can be of different kinds, different qualities. Sattvic
faith is the most evolved, the most pure. Rajasic faith is dynamic, evolving,
yet tainted with selfish motives. Tamasic faith goes astray in a spiritual
desert.
To illustrate this, Krishna tells Arjuna that sattvic people worship the
devas – the gods of heaven, of light. The rajasic worship yakshas and
rakshasas. The yakshas are servants of the god of wealth; rakshasas are
powerful, fearsome spirits driven by the lust for power and pleasure.
Finally, tamasic people worship the spirits of the dead and ghosts.
In a practical digression, Krishna describes the different kinds of food
liked by the sattvic, the rajasic, and the tamasic. Then he applies the three
gunas to the act of worship and sacrifice or selfless service (yajna).
Verses 14–16 turn to the important question of tapas or sadhana, the
disciplines undergone for the sake of spiritual growth. The Gita holds that
no lasting progress is possible on the spiritual path without self-discipline.
The root of the word tapas is tap, to be hot or to suffer pain; and in fact
tapas can also mean heat or suffering. When certain spiritual practices are
mastered, they create a feeling of heat in the body, which is a sign of

increased spiritual potency. Tapas also refers to the power gained through
spiritual austerity. Krishna dispels the mistaken belief that tapas means
mortifying or torturing the body, and points out that spiritual disciplines can
be sattvic, rajasic, or tamasic. The sattvic kind of tapas is offered for a truly
spiritual goal; rajasic tapas is performed to gain a selfish end, probably the
admiration of others. Deluded by tamas, a person will undergo painful,
foolish practices to try to gain power over, or even to injure, others.
Changing course for a moment, Krishna discusses the mantram Om Tat
Sat. Om is the most ancient of Hindu mantrams; it is the sacred syllable that
is Brahman, the cosmic sound heard in the depths of meditation. Tat is
“That,” the supreme reality beyond what language can describe or thought
can think. And sat means both “that which is” and “that which is good.”
The mantram Om Tat Sat affirms that only the good really exists; the
opposite word, asat, implies that evil is transient and therefore is not
ultimately real.
The last verse concludes that no act or intention can add to spiritual
growth if it is “faithless.” An act done without shraddha is asat, unreal; it
cannot have meaning either in this world or the next. –D.M.

17: The Power of Faith
ARJUNA
1 O Krishna, what is the state of those who disregard the scriptures

but still worship with faith? Do they act from sattva, rajas, or tamas?
KRISHNA
2 Every creature is born with faith of some kind, either sattvic,

rajasic, or tamasic. Listen, and I will describe each to you.
3 Our faith conforms to our nature, Arjuna. Human nature is made

of faith. A person is what his shraddha is.
4 Those who are sattvic worship the forms of God; those who are

rajasic worship power and wealth. Those who are tamasic worship
spirits and ghosts. 5 Some invent harsh penances. Motivated by
hypocrisy and egotism, 6 they torture their innocent bodies and me
who dwells within. Blinded by their strength and passion, they act
and think like demons.
7 The three kinds of faith express themselves in the habits of those

who hold them: in the food they like, the work they do, the
disciplines they practice, the gifts they give. Listen, and I will
describe their different ways.
8 Sattvic people enjoy food that is mild, tasty, substantial, agreeable,

and nourishing, food that promotes health, strength, cheerfulness,
and longevity. 9 Rajasic people like food that is salty or bitter, hot,
sour, or spicy – food that promotes pain, discomfort, and disease. 10

Tamasic people like overcooked, stale, leftover, and impure food,
food that has lost its taste and nutritional value.
11 The sattvic perform sacrifices with their entire mind fixed on the

purpose of the sacrifice. Without thought of reward, they follow the
teachings of the scriptures. 12 The rajasic perform sacrifices for the
sake of show and the good it will bring them. 13 The tamasic
perform sacrifices ignoring both the letter and the spirit. They omit
the proper prayers, the proper offerings, the proper food, and the
proper faith.
14 To offer service to the gods, to the good, to the wise, and to your

spiritual teacher; purity, honesty, continence, and nonviolence: these
are the disciplines of the body. 15 To offer soothing words, to speak
truly, kindly, and helpfully, and to study the scriptures: these are the
disciplines of speech. 16 Calmness, gentleness, silence, self-restraint,
and purity: these are the disciplines of the mind.
17 When these three levels of self-discipline are practiced without

attachment to the results, but in a spirit of great faith, the sages call
this practice sattvic. 18 Disciplines practiced in order to gain respect,
honor, or admiration are rajasic; they are undependable and
transitory in their effects. 19 Disciplines practiced to gain power
over others, or in the confused belief that to torture oneself is
spiritual, are tamasic.
20 Giving simply because it is right to give, without thought of

return, at a proper time, in proper circumstances, and to a worthy
person, is sattvic giving. 21 Giving with regrets or in the expectation
of receiving some favor or of getting something in return is rajasic.
22 Giving at an inappropriate time, in inappropriate circumstances,
and to an unworthy person, without affection or respect, is tamasic.
23 Om Tat Sat: these three words represent Brahman, from which

come priests and scriptures and sacrifice. 24 Those who follow the
Vedas, therefore, always repeat the word Om when offering
sacrifices, performing spiritual disciplines, or giving gifts. 25 Those
seeking liberation and not any personal benefit add the word Tat

when performing these acts of worship, discipline, and charity. 26
Sat means “that which is”; it also indicates goodness. Therefore it is
used to describe a worthy deed.
27 To be steadfast in self-sacrifice, self-discipline, and giving is sat.

To act in accordance with these three is sat as well. 28 But to engage
in sacrifice, self-discipline, and giving without good faith is asat,
without worth or goodness, either in this life or in the next.

Chapter Eighteen

Freedom & Renunciation
This final chapter of the Gita roams over many subjects, beginning with a
discussion of the merits of renunciation versus the life of personally
involved action. To begin with, Arjuna asks about two words commonly
used for renunciation in Sanskrit, sannyasa and tyaga. Both words come
from roots meaning to give up or abandon. Sannyasa acquired the
specialized meaning of giving up ordinary life to live the austere,
wandering life of a homeless pilgrim. A sannyasi is a monk: one who does
not participate in family life and has withdrawn from society. In a sense, he
has withdrawn from life. Krishna does not recommend this kind of
renunciation. In fact, he says it is impossible for anyone to “give up” in this
way, for as long as we have a body, we have to do a certain amount of work
just to maintain it. Krishna does not advise dropping out of life, and the
Gita is primarily aimed at people who live “in the world” yet desire genuine
spiritual fulfillment.
The kind of renunciation Krishna recommends is tyaga, where it is not
activity but selfish desire for the rewards of action – of work, of life – that
is to be renounced. Arjuna is advised to fulfill all his responsibilities, but
without a selfish motive. In particular, he should not give up the three great
virtuous works – sacrifice, giving, and spiritual disciplines.
Having made plain to Arjuna that renunciation is essential, Krishna goes
on to explain that renunciation can be of three kinds, depending upon the
guna that dominates the individual’s personality. As may be expected,
rajasic and tamasic renunciation leave something to be desired.
Many times Krishna has said that renunciation of the fruits of work is
essential. Perhaps the verse in chapter 2 said it best – that we have control
over our work and actions, but we have no command of the results. The
word karma-phala-tyaga appears again and again, and the literal translation
is “renunciation of the fruits of action.” In this final chapter, literally “The
Freedom [moksha] That Comes from Renunciation,” Krishna sums up his
teaching that in work, in life, one must not be driven by a selfish desire for
any kind of reward, for such compulsive work can only stunt full spiritual
development. In addition, Krishna points out, when we act out of selfish

attachment, we must fully partake of the result, the karma, of every thought,
word, and deed; and although these results may be what was desired, they
may also be something not desired at all, or a little of both (18:12). In this
life we can never be sure that things will turn out as planned.
In verse 13 the Sankhya philosophy is again mentioned. Scholars believe
that at the time the Gita was composed the Sankhya school was at an early
stage of development, yet even here we see the characteristic method of
thorough categorizing. Using the Sankhya categories of the three gunas, the
Gita goes on to give more detail about work, which is of three kinds –
sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic. Similarly, the doer of the work is shown to be
dominated by one of these all-pervasive qualities. In a very interesting
passage Krishna talks of three kinds of happiness – a practical application
of the abstract theories of Sankhya (18:36–39).
Pursuing the world of work, and how it contributes to spiritual growth,
the Gita gives a short explanation of caste in this chapter. The Gita is not
especially interested in caste – the social hierarchy of Hindu society – but
we do find a short explanation here. The sannyasi, the renouncing monk,
has left society and therefore belongs to no caste, but Krishna does not
point out that course to Arjuna. Rather, he wants Arjuna to lead an active
life. Krishna tells him that devotion to his own duty is best. It is better to do
one’s own work, even if imperfectly, than to try to take on some other work.
The work proper to each of the four castes is then described. In general, the
Gita takes a liberal view of caste, and it would be wrong to interpret this
chapter as supporting a rigid caste system.
The final part of this chapter, verses 50 and following, give a picture of
the person who has attained siddhi– success or perfection – in the spiritual
life and who goes on to union with Brahman.
In verse 61 Krishna returns to a favorite topic – the Lord dwelling in the
hearts of all beings. But here he adds a startling revelation: the Lord dwells
in all, yet he “whirls them around” through maya as if they were toys
mounted on a machine. Having jarred Arjuna with this amazing image,
Krishna reassures him that he can escape from the machine, the wheel of
time, through devotion to God. If he wholeheartedly takes refuge in the
Lord within, then through Krishna’s grace he will find peace.
As his all but final word, Krishna reminds Arjuna that he holds him very
dear. Through devotion, Arjuna will be able to find his way, and he should
not forget that Krishna feels deep love for him.

The relationship between the teacher and student is given a parting word,
partially of warning. Krishna does not want these profound truths told to
anyone who is not ready. Anyone lacking devotion or self-control, who
does not want to hear spiritual instruction or who scoffs at it, should not be
accepted as a student. The sacred act of giving spiritual instruction cannot
be undertaken lightly. It is the highest work, and the man or woman who
does it is most dear to Krishna.
Finally, Krishna asks Arjuna if he has understood. Arjuna says yes, his
conflicts are over; he is ready to follow Krishna’s instructions. This
concludes the dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna and the instruction of
the Gita proper. Sanjaya, who has been narrating the poem to blind king
Dhritarashtra, adds a few final verses of benediction. He has “seen” this
dialogue through his mystic vision, granted by the grace of Vyasa. Just
recalling this wonderful conversation makes his hair stand on end in
ecstasy, and when he remembers Krishna’s wonderful beauty, his joy is
boundless. –D.M.

18: Freedom & Renunciation
ARJUNA
1 O Krishna, destroyer of evil, please explain to me sannyasa and

tyaga and how one kind of renunciation differs from another.
KRISHNA
2 To refrain from selfish acts is one kind of renunciation, called

sannyasa; to renounce the fruit of action is another, called tyaga.
3 Among the wise, some say that all action should be renounced as

evil. Others say that certain kinds of action – self-sacrifice, giving,
and self-discipline – should be continued. 4 Listen, Arjuna, and I
will explain three kinds of tyaga and my conclusions concerning
them.
5 Self-sacrifice, giving, and self-discipline should not be renounced,

for they purify the thoughtful. 6 Yet even these, Arjuna, should be
performed without desire for selfish rewards. This is essential.
7 To renounce one’s responsibilities is not fitting. The wise call such

deluded renunciation tamasic. 8 To avoid action from fear of
difficulty or physical discomfort is rajasic. There is no reward in
such renunciation. 9 But to fulfill your responsibilities knowing that
they are obligatory, while at the same time desiring nothing for
yourself – this is sattvic renunciation. 10 Those endowed with sattva
clearly understand the meaning of renunciation and do not waver.
They are not intimidated by unpleasant work, nor do they seek a job
because it is pleasant.

11 As long as one has a body, one cannot renounce action altogether.

True renunciation is giving up all desire for personal reward. 12
Those who are attached to personal reward will reap the
consequences of their actions: some pleasant, some unpleasant,
some mixed. But those who renounce every desire for personal
reward go beyond the reach of karma.
13 Listen, Arjuna, and I will explain the five elements necessary for

the accomplishment of every action, as taught by the wisdom of
Sankhya. 14 The body, the means, the ego, the performance of the
act, and the divine will: 15 these are the five factors in all actions,
right or wrong, in thought, word, or deed.
16 Those who do not understand this think of themselves as separate

agents. With their crude intellects they fail to see the truth. 17 The
person who is free from ego, who has attained purity of heart,
though he slays these people, he does not slay and is not bound by
his action.
18 Knowledge, the thing to be known, and the knower: these three

promote action. The means, the act itself, and the doer: these three
are the totality of action. 19 Knowledge, action, and the doer can be
described according to the gunas. Listen, and I will explain their
distinctions to you.
20 Sattvic knowledge sees the one indestructible Being in all beings,

the unity underlying the multiplicity of creation. 21 Rajasic
knowledge sees all things and creatures as separate and distinct. 22
Tamasic knowledge, lacking any sense of perspective, sees one
small part and mistakes it for the whole.
23 Work performed to fulfill one’s obligations, without thought of

personal reward or of whether the job is pleasant or unpleasant, is
sattvic. 24 Work prompted by selfish desire or self-will, full of
stress, is rajasic. 25 Work that is undertaken blindly, without any
consideration of consequences, waste, injury to others, or one’s own
capacities, is tamasic.

26 Sattvic workers are free from egotism and selfish attachments,

full of enthusiasm and fortitude in success and failure alike. 27
Rajasic workers have strong personal desires and crave rewards for
their actions. Covetous, impure, and destructive, they are easily
swept away by fortune, good or bad. 28 Tamasic workers are
undisciplined, vulgar, stubborn, deceitful, dishonest, and lazy. They
are easily depressed and prone to procrastination.
29 Listen, Arjuna, as I describe the three types of understanding and

will.
30 To know when to act and when to refrain from action, what is

right action and what is wrong, what brings security and what
insecurity, what brings freedom and what bondage: these are the
signs of a sattvic intellect.
31 The rajasic intellect confuses right and wrong actions, and cannot

distinguish what is to be done from what should not be done. 32 The
tamasic intellect is shrouded in darkness, utterly reversing right and
wrong wherever it turns.
33 The sattvic will, developed through meditation, keeps prana,

mind, and senses in vital harmony. 34 The rajasic will, conditioned
by selfish desire, pursues wealth, pleasure, and respectability. 35 The
tamasic will shows itself in obstinate ignorance, sloth, fear, grief,
depression, and conceit.
36 Now listen, Arjuna: there are also three kinds of happiness. By

sustained effort, one comes to the end of sorrow. 37 That which
seems like poison at first, but tastes like nectar in the end – this is
the joy of sattva, born of a mind at peace with itself. 38 Pleasure
from the senses seems like nectar at first, but it is bitter as poison in
the end. This is the kind of happiness that comes to the rajasic. 39
Those who are tamasic draw their pleasures from sleep, indolence,
and intoxication. Both in the beginning and in the end, this
happiness is a delusion.

40 No creature, whether born on earth or among the gods in heaven,

is free from the conditioning of the three gunas. 41 The different
responsibilities found in the social order – distinguishing brahmin,
kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra – have their roots in this
conditioning.
42 The responsibilities to which brahmins are born, based on their

nature, are self-control, tranquility, purity of heart, patience,
humility, learning, austerity, wisdom, and faith.
43 The qualities of kshatriyas, based on their nature, are courage,

strength, fortitude, dexterity, generosity, leadership, and the firm
resolve never to retreat from battle. 44 The occupations suitable for a
vaishya are agriculture, dairying, and trade. The proper work of a
shudra is service.
45 By devotion to one’s own particular duty, everyone can attain

perfection. Let me tell you how. 46 By performing one’s own work,
one worships the Creator who dwells in every creature. Such
worship brings that person to fulfillment.
47 It is better to perform one’s own duties imperfectly than to master

the duties of another. By fulfilling the obligations he is born with, a
person never comes to grief. 48 No one should abandon duties
because he sees defects in them. Every action, every activity, is
surrounded by defects as a fire is surrounded by smoke.
49 One who is free from selfish attachments, who has mastered

himself and his passions, attains the supreme perfection of freedom
from action. 50 Listen and I shall explain now, Arjuna, how one who
has attained perfection also attains Brahman, the supreme
consummation of wisdom.
51 Unerring in discrimination, sovereign of the senses and passions,

free from the clamor of likes and dislikes, 52 such a one leads a
simple, self-reliant life based on meditation, controlling speech,
body, and mind.

53 Free from self-will, aggressiveness, arrogance, anger, and the lust

to possess people or things, they are at peace with themselves and
others and enter into the unitive state. 54 United with Brahman, ever
joyful, beyond the reach of desire and sorrow, they have equal
regard for every living creature and attain supreme devotion to me.
55 By loving me they come to know me truly; then they know my
glory and enter into my boundless being. 56 All their acts are
performed in my service, and through my grace they win eternal
life.
57 Make every act an offering to me; regard me as your only

protector. Relying on interior discipline, meditate on me always. 58
Remembering me, you shall overcome all difficulties through my
grace. But if you will not heed me in your self-will, nothing will
avail you.
59 If you egotistically say, “I will not fight this battle,” your resolve

will be useless; your own nature will drive you into it. 60 Your own
karma, born of your own nature, will drive you to do even that
which you do not wish to do, because of your delusion.
61 The Lord dwells in the hearts of all creatures and whirls them

round upon the wheel of maya. 62 Run to him for refuge with all
your strength, and peace profound will be yours through his grace.
63 I give you these precious words of wisdom; reflect on them and

then do as you choose. 64 These are the last words I shall speak to
you, dear one, for your spiritual fulfillment. You are very dear to
me.
65 Be aware of me always, adore me, make every act an offering to

me, and you shall come to me; this I promise; for you are dear to
me. 66 Abandon all supports and look to me for protection. I shall
purify you from the sins of the past; do not grieve.
67 Do not share this wisdom with anyone who lacks in devotion or

self-control, lacks the desire to learn, or scoffs at me. 68 Those who
teach this supreme mystery of the Gita to all who love me perform

the greatest act of love; they will come to me without doubt. 69 No
one can render me more devoted service; no one on earth can be
more dear to me.
70 Those who meditate on these holy words worship me with

wisdom and devotion. 71 Even those who listen to them with faith,
free from doubts, will find a happier world where good people
dwell.
72 Have you listened with attention? Are you now free from your

doubts and confusion?
ARJUNA
73 You have dispelled my doubts and delusions, and I understand

through your grace. My faith is firm now, and I will do your will.
SANJAYA
74 This is the dialogue I heard between Krishna, the son of

Vasudeva, and Arjuna, the great-hearted son of Pritha. The wonder
of it makes my hair stand on end! 75 Through Vyasa’s grace, I have
heard the supreme secret of spiritual union directly from the Lord of
Yoga, Krishna himself.
76 Whenever I remember these wonderful, holy words between

Krishna and Arjuna, I am filled with joy. 77 And when I remember
the breathtaking form of Krishna, I am filled with wonder and my
joy overflows.
78 Wherever the divine Krishna and the mighty Arjuna are, there

will be prosperity, victory, happiness, and sound judgment. Of this I
am sure!

Notes
CHAPTER ONE

1 The phrase “on the field of dharma” (dharma-kshetre) gives a hint that the
battle is to be an allegorical one, a fight of dharma, justice, against
adharma, evil. The battle takes place not only at Kurukshetra, the
“field of the Kurus,” but also on the elusive “field of dharma,” the
spiritual realm where all moral struggles are waged.
40–44 These verses are particularly difficult to translate, because they
revolve around the complex word dharma: law, justice, or simply
something’s inner nature. To try to capture the word in English we
might say “God’s law” or “eternal truth.” Dharma is divinely given; it
is the force that holds things together in a unity, the center that must
hold if all is to go well. The opposite of dharma is adharma: evil,
injustice, chaos. In these verses Arjuna gives expression to his fears of
a coming chaos, an evil world where good people will be confused and
violated. “Sense of unity” here translates dharma; the phrase “loses its
sense of unity” would be more literally translated as “is overcome by
adharma.”
The translation speaks in a general way of the chaos that overcomes
society when dharma is weak – when ancient spiritual truths are
ignored. Thus varna-samkara, literally “confusion of caste,” is more
meaningful as “society [is] plunged into chaos.” The subject here is
not the observance of caste restrictions, but the essential cohesion of
the social fabric.
42 The Sanskrit refers to the ancient pinda rites that offer homage to dead
ancestors. These rites maintained the traditions of the family by
respecting and worshipping those who had gone before. Again, the
rather liberal rendering “the spiritual evolution begun by our
ancestors” seems preferable to a narrower translation.
CHAPTER TWO

17 Tat, “that,” is an ancient name for Brahman, the supreme reality.
Brahman is neither masculine nor feminine; in fact, it has no attributes
at all. It is impossible to describe Brahman in words, so it is simply
pointed to: tat.
72 The state of immortality is brahma-nirvana, “the nirvana that is
Brahman.” This is the state of release or liberation, union with the
divine ground of existence. The word nirvana comes from the Sanskrit
root va “to blow” with the prefix nir “out”; it means “to extinguish,” as
a fire is said to be “blown out.” Thus it indicates the extinction of the
old, limited personality. By adding the word brahman, complete union
with the universal Godhead is indicated. Brahma-nirvana then means
the mystic state of extinction of self in the union with God. Nirvana is
a Buddhist term as well. Some misconceptions are unfortunately
current about this rather esoteric concept. Nirvana is wrongly
presented as a kind of empty nothingness, even a spiritual death. We
get exactly the opposite impression if we approach the Hindus and
Buddhists themselves. It is true there is much talk of extinguishing the
petty ego and going beyond self-will – the mask that hides the creative,
wise, loving Self underneath. This “death” of the old person to make
way for the new is one purpose of spiritual disciplines. It can be
painful, but the death of the old does not lead to annihilation but to a
spiritual rebirth.
CHAPTER THREE

9 Here and later yajna is translated as “selfless work” or “selfless service.”
The literal meaning is sacrifice: essentially, self-sacrifice, giving up
something one greatly values for the sake of a higher purpose. Some
translators give a very narrow translation of yajna as a ritualistic
sacrifice, but this is inaccurate.
39 Kama can be translated as selfish desire or pleasure, and often carries a
connotation of sensual desire or sexual passion. It means essentially a
personal desire for ease or pleasure, not “desire” of a more altruistic
kind.
CHAPTER FOUR

37 This is a well-known verse. The meanings of karma are complex, but the
verse is widely taken to mean that true knowledge destroys the effects
of past errors, which generate further karma. When consciousness is
unified and illumined, one is released from the bondage of karma.
CHAPTER FIVE

6 Yoga has many meanings in the Gita. Here yoga is translated as “action”
and “selfless service” because a contrast is being made between
Sankhya and yoga: that is, between philosophical explanation and the
actual practice of the spiritual life.
9 The word for “senses” in Sanskrit is indriya, literally “faculty” or
“power.” The indriyas are not only the five faculties of perception
(seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, and tasting) but also those of
action, whose organs are the hands, the feet, the tongue, and the organs
of excretion and reproduction.
13 “The city of nine gates” is the body. The gates are the two eyes, the two
nostrils, the two ears, the mouth, and the organs of excretion and
reproduction. In some lists these gates are expanded to eleven by
adding the navel and the brahmarandhra or sagittal suture, the opening
at the top of the skull.
27–28 The area “of spiritual consciousness” between the eyebrows is one of
the seven centers of awareness or chakras described in yoga literature.
These seven chakras, though not physical, are said to lie along a
channel for awakened spiritual energy (kundalini) that corresponds
with the spine; the chakras are located at the level of the anus, sex
organs, stomach, heart, throat, eyebrows, and the top of the head.
Kundalini circulates among these centers, but it is usually confined to
the lowest three chakras, corresponding to the main preoccupations of
life on the physical level. In yogic concentration the vital energy
(kundalini) rises; samadhi is said to take place when it reaches the
chakras at the brow or head.
CHAPTER SIX

11 This describes the traditional seat used for meditation. The Gita is not
concerned with the outer forms of the spiritual life, but here we do get
a mention of the grass and deerskin used by the ancient sages. Perhaps
the point is that they used what was available in their forest retreats,
and that the seat should be what Patanjali calls sukhasana: comfortable
enough to forget about your body.
14 “All actions dedicated to Brahman” is a literal translation of the Sanskrit
word brahmacharya, a life of self-control and sense restraint.
CHAPTER SEVEN

16 Artharthi has given translators some difficulties. “Those who desire to
achieve their purpose” captures the basic meaning of the word. Artha
is goal or purpose; the second word of the compound, arthi, means
“one who has a goal.” So artharthi probably refers to those who take
to the spiritual life with a particular purpose in view. Artha also means
wealth or worldly goods, but to translate this phrase as “those who
desire wealth” would go against the entire tenor of the Gita.
23 “The gods” here are the devas, the lower, celestial deities such as Indra.
30 These obscure terms (adhibhuta, adhidaiva, and adhiyajna) are taken up
in the next chapter.
CHAPTER EIGHT

6 Whatever is the content of the mind at the moment of death determines
the direction of the soul’s rebirth. The implication is that whatever has
been the bedrock of consciousness during life will be remembered at
the time of death and lead the soul on to fulfill that desire in the next
life.
9–10 The eyebrow center is discussed in the note to 5:27–28.
CHAPTER NINE

5 Yoga here means “mysterious power.” This is yet another meaning
attached to the word yoga, for those who practiced yoga were

sometimes thought of as concealing within themselves extraordinary
powers developed through their disciplines. The folklore of India
relates many stories about mysterious yogis who have strange, divine
powers.
Krishna speaks here of his yoga aishvaram, his mysterious and
majestic power. Ishvara means “lord” and aishvaram “lordly”:
Krishna’s yoga is something he uses as Ishvara, the Lord of the world.
Now he begins to show Arjuna something of the nature of the mystery.
17 Rig, Yajur, and Sama are the principal Vedas, the ancient scriptures that
are Hinduism’s orthodox authority.
20–21 These verses repeat the idea that heaven itself is an impermanent
state. After exhausting the store of their good karma, the blessed souls
in heaven must be reborn on earth. Only the liberated soul, the one
who has found union with Krishna or brahmanirvana, escapes the
round of rebirth and death as a separate, mortal creature.
CHAPTER TEN

This chapter contains many Sanskrit names, which are briefly identified
in the glossary (see p. 279).
18 Amrita, “immortal,” comes from a “not” and mrita “mortal.” The Greek
word ambrosia is cognate and has the same meanings: amrita is the
ambrosia of the gods, the drink that makes them live forever, and in a
general sense it means sweet or nectar-like. So the translation could
also be “your words, which are like ambrosia.”
22 The mind (manas) is here taken to be one of the senses or indriyas of
perception; for example, it is really with the mind rather than with the
eye that we see.
33 The Sanskrit alphabet, too, begins with the letter a; perhaps this is why
Krishna declares that among letters he is a, the first. Another possible
reason is that a is the most frequent sound in Sanskrit.
CHAPTER ELEVEN

14 Here Arjuna presses the palms of his hands together in the gesture called
anjali, like the Western gesture of prayer. This is the usual form of
respectful greeting in India, as well as being used in worship and
prayer.
15 Brahma, the Creator (not to be confused with Brahman, the attributeless
Godhead, which is beyond the Trinity of creation, preservation, and
destruction) sits within a lotus that grows from the navel of Lord
Vishnu.
17 Here Arjuna sees not his friend Krishna, but the Lord incarnate in
Krishna: Vishnu, armed with his traditional weapons, a club (or mace)
and a discus. Not mentioned in this verse are the two benign symbols
he carries in his other hands, a conch and a lotus.
CHAPTER TWELVE

1 Arjuna is asking which path is superior, that of knowledge (jnana yoga) or
love (bhakti yoga).
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

5 This is a list of all the twenty-four categories given in Sankhya
philosophy to describe phenomena in the field of prakriti.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

1 The ashvattha is the sacred pipal tree, a kind of fig often grown in temple
compounds in India. The idea of a “world tree” appears in many
ancient cultures. Here the Gita uses the image of the tree as “upside
down,” drawing on the fact that the pipal sends out aerial roots,
making “branches above and below.” The image illustrates the
phenomenal world, rooted in Brahman, complete unity, and branching
out into the apparent diversity of life.
13 Rasatmaka soma is here translated as “life-giving fluid,” the
nourishment of plants. In Hindu mythology it is the moon, sometimes
called Soma, that nourishes plants, as the source of the life-giving
nectar called Soma. In the Vedas, soma is an intoxicating, invigorating

drink distilled from a plant grown high in the mountains and drunk by
participants in a sacred ritual. Scholars have tried to discover what the
soma plant might have been, but so far no conclusive identification has
been made. Soma also appears as an important god in the Vedas.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

27–28 Sat means that which is real or true and that which is good; it derives
from the Sanskrit verb as, to be, and is directly related to our English
word is. It is noteworthy that this word sat links reality and goodness,
reflecting the idea that good is eternal; it is merely covered from time
to time by asat, evil, which is temporary and in that sense unreal. Asat
is formed from sat by the addition of the prefix a “without,” very
much the way English forms words like amoral.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

1 Sannyasa and tyaga both mean renunciation, sannyasa from the root as
“to cast aside” and tyaga from tyaj “to give up.” The distinction
between these two is clarified in the introduction to this chapter.
14 “The divine will” is a translation of daivam, which comes from the word
deva, “god.” Daivam is sometimes translated as “fate,” but this is
inappropriate in the Gita, which is not at all fatalistic. The Gita does,
however, allow a place for God’s will or Providence in the affairs of
humankind – though of course the dominant force is usually karma,
not daivam.
34 This verse uses the phrase dharma-kama-artha, “duty, pleasure, and
wealth,” traditionally considered the three goals of ordinary human
life. The fourth and highest goal is moksha, salvation. The rajasic
personality, as this verse points out, pursues the first three worldly
goals; moksha is ignored.
41 The Vedas establish the fourfold division of society into the classes of
brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra – roughly priests and
intellectuals; warriors and rulers; businessmen, farmers, and craftsmen;
and workers and servants.

66 Dharma is not used here in the usual sense of law or inner nature, but in
a rarer meaning: a thing’s attribute, condition, or conditioning. Usually
dharma is used in this sense only in the plural, as here: thus dharma is
divine law; dharmas are the innumerable beings, things, emotions and
mental states that make up everyday existence as we experience it.
Here, following the root meaning (dhri, to support or hold up), sarvadharman is translated as “all your supports,” in the sense of external
props, conditioned dependencies. Another translation would be: “Cast
off your dependency on everything external, Arjuna, and rely on the
Self alone.”

Glossary
This brief glossary is a guide to Sanskrit terms used in this volume. Words
used once and explained in context are not included. As a rough guide,
Sanskrit vowels may be pronounced as in Italian or Spanish. The
combinations kh, gh, jh, th, dh, ph, and bh are always pronounced as the
consonant plus a slight h sound: e.g., ph as in haphazard (not as in phone).
Pronounce ch as in church; h as in home; g as in gold; j as in June except in
the combination jn, which can be pronounced like gn in Italian compagna.
The other consonants are approximately as in English.
Every Sanskrit vowel has a short and a long form, the long pronounced
for twice as long as the short. The diphthongs – e, ai, o, au – are also long.
The Sanskrit alphabet has 48 characters, each representing a precisely
defined sound. Scholars represent these characters in our Roman alphabet
by adding marks to letters as necessary, creating a system of spelling that is
precise but confusing to the general reader. For simplicity, these
differentiating marks have been omitted in this e-book, but may be found in
the printed edition.
adharma “Not dharma.” Injustice, evil, anything which goes against moral
laws.
advaita Having no duality; the supreme Reality, which is the “One without
a second.” The word advaita is especially used in Vedanta philosophy,
which stresses the unity of the Self (Atman) and Brahman.
ahamkara [aham “I”; kara “maker”] Self-will, separateness.
ahimsa [a “not”; himsa “violence”] Nonviolence, doing no injury, wishing
no harm.
akasha Space, sky; the most subtle of the five elements.
akshara The eternal; the syllable Om.
Ananta The cosmic serpent on which Vishnu reclines in rest.

apara [“not transcendent”] Lower knowledge; intellectual knowledge.
Arjuna One of the five Pandava brothers and an important figure in Indian
epic and legend. He is Sri Krishna’s beloved disciple and friend in the
Bhagavad Gita.
Aryaman “The noble one,” a Vedic god, revered as an ancestor of mankind.
asat [a “not”; sat “truth, goodness”] Untruth; anything unreal, untrue, or
lacking in goodness.
ashvattha The pipal tree, a kind of fig; it is regarded as holy and often
grows in temple compounds.
Ashvatthama A great archer and warrior who is Drona’s son.
asura In Hindu myth, a demon; figuratively, a being with an evil nature.
Atman “Self”; the innermost soul in every creature, which is divine.
avatara [ava “down”; tri “to cross”] The descent of God to earth; the
incarnation of Vishnu on earth; the birth of divine consciousness in the
human heart.
avidya [a “not”; vidya “wisdom”] Ignorance, lack of wisdom, want of
knowledge.
avyaya The eternal, the changeless.
Bhagavad Gita [Bhagavat “lord”; gita “song”] “The Song of the Lord,”
name of a Hindu scripture which contains the instructions of Sri
Krishna.
bhakti Devotion, worship, love.
bhakti yoga The Way of Love.
Bhishma A revered elder of the Kaurava dynasty who allows himself to be
killed by Arjuna in the Mahabharata battle.

Bhrigu A sage famous in ancient legend.
Brahma God as creator, one of the Hindu Trinity; the others are Vishnu, the
Preserver, and Shiva, the Destroyer. Brahma should not be confused
with Brahman. (See entry below.)
brahmacharya “Conduct leading to God,” self-control, purity.
Brahman The supreme reality underlying all life, the divine ground of
existence, the impersonal Godhead.
brahmanirvana “Nirvana in Brahman,” the final state of spiritual
fulfillment: eternal union with Brahman, the ground of all being.
Brahmavidya The science of knowing Brahman.
brahmin [Skt. brahmana] Literally, a person who strives to know Brahman;
in traditional Hindu society, a person of the priestly or learned class.
Brihaspati The guru or priest of the gods.
Buddha [from budh “to wake up”] “The Awakened one,” the title given to
the sage Siddhartha Gautama Shakyamuni after he obtained complete
illumination. The Buddha lived and taught in North India during the
sixth century B.C.
buddhi Understanding, intelligence; the faculty of discrimination; correct
view, idea, purpose.
Chitraratha “Having a bright chariot,” the king of Gandharvas.
daivam Divine will; destiny.
deva A divine being, a god. The devas of Hindu mythology resemble the
Olympians of the ancient Greeks – extraordinary, immortal, yet not
unlike mortal men and women in their behavior. The feminine is devi,
“goddess.”
dharma Law, duty; the universal law which holds all life together in unity.

Dhritarashtra The king of the Kurus. He has been blind since birth and has
therefore never been enthroned as the rightful king, but he serves as de
facto ruler. The entire Bhagavad Gita is a narration told by Sanjaya to
the blind king, whose sons are the Kauravas.
Draupadi The royal princess who became the wife of each of the five
Pandava brothers.
Drona A learned brahmin who became a warrior, and eventually general of
the Kaurava army. The preceptor of the royal princes, he taught the
heroes of the Mahabharata the skills of war.
duhkha Pain, suffering, sorrow.
Duryodhana The oldest son of Dhritarashtra and the chief enemy of the
Pandavas and Sri Krishna.
dvandva In Sanskrit grammar, a kind of compound that combines two or
more words as a pair or group.
Gandharva Heavenly musicians who are demigods, rather touchy and
proud, handsome and amorous.
Gandiva Arjuna’s bow, which was a gift from the god of fire.
Ganges [Skt. ganga] A major river of northern India, revered as a sacred
symbol.
Garuda The great eagle that is Vishnu’s vehicle.
gayatri A meter used in Vedic hymns; a prayer to the sun composed in this
meter.
Gita “The Song,” a shorter title for the Bhagavad Gita.
guna Quality; specifically, the three qualities which make up the
phenomenal world: sattva, law, harmony, purity, goodness; rajas,
energy, passion; and tamas, inertia, ignorance. The corresponding
adjectives are sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic.

guru A spiritual teacher.
Hari Name of Vishnu or Krishna.
Hastinapura “City of the elephants,” an important city in ancient India,
located about sixty miles northeast of the modern Delhi. It was the
capital of the Pandavas and their line.
Himalaya [hima “snow”; alaya “abode”] The great mountain range which
stretches across the northern border of India, important in mythology
as the home of Shiva and other gods.
Ikshvaku The son of Manu, and founder of the Solar Dynasty of kings.
Indra The god of storms and battle. In the Veda, Indra is the chief of the
gods (devas) and an important deity; later his role is greatly
diminished.
Ishvara The Lord; God.
Janaka A king of ancient times who was both an effective ruler and a holy
sage.
Janardana “He who stirs up the people,” name of Krishna.
jiva Living being; the living soul; the finite, individual soul that is identified
with separate existence, as opposed to Atman, the eternal Self.
jnana [from jna “to know”] Wisdom; higher knowledge.
jnana yoga The Way of Wisdom.
kalpa A period in cosmic time equaling one Day of Brahma or 1,000 “great
yugas” – a total of 4,320 million years. See also yuga.
kama Selfish desire, greed; sexual desire, sometimes personified as
Kamadeva.
Kamadhuk “The cow of wishes,” who in legend fulfills all desires.

Kapila Name of a sage, first teacher of the Sankhya philosophy.
karma [from kri “to do”] Action; former actions which will lead to certain
results in a cause-and-effect relationship.
karma yoga The Way of Action; the path of selfless service.
Karna A brave warrior who plays an important role in the larger epic, but is
only mentioned in passing in the Gita.
Kauravas “The sons of Kuru,” Duryodhana and his brothers, who are the
enemies of the Pandava brothers.
Kripa A revered teacher of the royal family who also serves as a warrior.
Krishna [“black”; or from krish “to draw, to attract to oneself”] “The Dark
One” or “He who draws us to Himself,” name of an incarnation of
Vishnu. Vishnu, the cosmic force of goodness, comes to earth as
Krishna to reestablish dharma, or law. Krishna is the friend and advisor
of the Pandava brothers, especially Arjuna, to whom he reveals the
teachings of the Bhagavad Gita. He is the inner Lord, who personifies
spiritual love and lives in the hearts of all beings.
kshatriya A warrior or prince; a member of the ruling class of traditional
Hindu society.
kshetra A field; a place; a sacred place or temple.
Kubera God of wealth.
kundalini “The serpent power,” spiritual or evolutionary energy. In yoga
literature, kundalini is described as a force coiled at the base of the
spine. Kundalini may be aroused through meditation and the practice
of yoga; then it rises up through the subtle body, awakening the higher
centers of consciousness.
Kurukshetra “The field of the Kurus,” where the Mahabharata battle takes
place. It is north of the modern city of Delhi.

lila Game; the divine play of the Lord disguising himself as the many
beings of this world.
Madhava Another name for Krishna, “of the Madhava clan.”
Madhusudana “Slayer of Madhu,” a name for Krishna, who killed the
demon Madhu.
Mahabharata Name of the great Indian epic composed some 2,500 years
ago, traditionally attributed to the sage Vyasa. It relates the conflict
between the descendants of Pandu (the forces of light) and those of
Dhritarashtra (the forces of darkness).
manas The mind; specifically, the faculty which registers and stores sensory
impressions.
mantram [or mantra] A holy name or phrase; a spiritual formula.
Manu The father of the human race, the Hindu equivalent of Adam or the
first man.
Margashirsha The lunar month that falls in November – December.
Marichi A Vedic demigod. The name means “particle of light.”
Maya Illusion; appearance, as contrasted with Reality; the creative power of
God.
Meera A woman saint of medieval India remembered for her songs to her
beloved Krishna.
Meru A mythical mountain said to stand at the center of the world or
cosmos. The gods dwell on Meru in beautiful cities, amidst flowering
gardens.
moksha Liberation, salvation, illumination.
Nakula One of the junior Pandava brothers.

Narada The divine musician and sage who is a devotee of Sri Krishna.
Nirvana [nir “out”; vana “to blow”] Complete extinction of self-will and
separateness; realization of the unity of all life.
nirvikalpa samadhi A state of spiritual awareness in which there is no
perception of duality, of inside or outside, of subject and object;
merger in the impersonal Godhead.
Om [or Aum] The cosmic sound, heard in deep meditation; the Holy Word,
taught in the Upanishads, which signifies Brahman, the divine ground
of existence.
Pandavas “The sons of Pandu,” a collective name for Arjuna and his four
brothers, Yudhishthira, Bhima, Nakula, and Sahadeva. The Pandavas
are in conflict with the Kauravas; both claim the ancient throne of
Hastinapura. The Gita is placed on the eve of the battle that will decide
this conflict. The Pandavas are looked upon as the forces for good and
the Kauravas as wicked usurpers.
Partha “Son of Pritha,” a name for Arjuna – or for his brothers Bhima and
Yudhishthira.
Patanjali The author of the Yoga Sutras, a classic description of the way to
Self-realization through meditation. Patanjali lived around the second
century B.C., and his method is sometimes referred to as raja yoga.
Pavaka “The purifier,” a name for the god of fire.
Prahlada A demon prince who was greatly devoted to Vishnu.
Prajapati “Lord of offspring,” the creator of all beings. Indian myth
encompasses many creation stories, and sometimes one great Father, or
Prajapati, is mentioned; sometimes there are seven or more fathers or
sages who created all living creatures.
prajna [from jna “to know” ] A transcendental mode of knowing developed
in deep meditation.

prakriti The basic energy from which the mental and physical worlds take
shape; nature.
prana Breath; vital force.
Pritha Arjuna’s mother (also called Kunti). Arjuna is called Partha, “son of
Pritha.”
Purusha [“person”] The soul; the spiritual core of every person. In the Gita,
the terms Atman and Purusha are virtually interchangeable.
Purushottama “Highest Person,” Supreme Being, God.
raja yoga “The Royal Path”; the path of meditation taught especially by
Patanjali in the Yoga Sutras.
rajas See under guna.
Rama “Prince of Joy,” name of the son of Dasharatha, who was king of
Ayodhya. Rama was the famous prince who killed the evil demon
Ravana to reclaim his wife Sita. He is regarded as an incarnation of
Vishnu.
Rig Veda The oldest of the four Vedas, the most ancient and sacred Hindu
scriptures.
Rudras A group of gods associated with storm and destruction. Sometimes
the Rudras are mentioned as a group; at other times they are thought of
as a single god, Rudra. In later Hinduism, Shiva is called Rudra.
sadhana A body of disciplines or way of life which leads to the supreme
goal of Self-realization.
sadhu A holy man, sage.
Sahadeva One of the junior Pandava brothers.
Sama Veda The Veda of songs and chants. One of the four Vedas.

samadhi Mystical union with God; a state of intense concentration in which
consciousness is completely unified.
samsara The world of flux; the round of birth, decay, death and rebirth.
Sanjaya The sage who divinely perceives what is taking place on the
battlefield and reports it to the blind king Dhritarashtra.
Sankhya One of the six branches of Hindu philosophy. Sankhya seeks to
liberate the individual Purusha (spirit) from prakriti (mind and
matter).
sannyasa Renunciation.
sat [from as “to be”] The Real; truth; goodness.
sattva See under guna.
satya Truth, truthful; good, the Good.
savikalpa samadhi [sa-vikalpa “having distinctions” or “admitting
separateness”] Samadhi in which some duality of subject and object
remains, the devotee being absorbed in meditation without becoming
completely identified with the object of contemplation; union with the
personal God.
Shakti Power; God’s feminine aspect; the Divine Mother.
shama Peace; the peace of deep meditation.
Shankara “Giver of peace,” a name of Shiva.
Shiva The third person of the Hindu Trinity, the other two being Brahma,
the Creator, and Vishnu, the Preserver. Shiva destroys, but he also
conquers death.
shraddha Faith.
shudra The fourth Hindu caste; a worker or servant.

Skanda A god of war, the son of Shiva; general of the divine forces when
they go into battle against the demons.
soma A drink used in Vedic ritual; the drink of the gods.
Sri [pronounced shri] A title of respect originally meaning “auspicious” or
“holy.”
svadharma The duty appropriate to a particular person, one’s own
individual dharma.
tamas See under guna.
tapas Austerity, control of the senses; the spiritual power acquired through
self-control.
tyaga Renunciation.
Upanishads Ancient mystical documents found at the end of each of the
four Vedas.
Ushanas A sage and poet who appears in the Vedas.
varna Caste or class.
Varuna God of waters and the ocean; in the Vedas, the moral overseer of the
world.
Vasuki The king of the serpents, he lives in the underworld and balances the
earth on his serpent hood.
Veda [from vid “to know”] “Knowledge”; the name of the most ancient
Sanskrit scriptures, considered to be a direct revelation from God to
the mystics of the past.
vidya Knowledge, wisdom; a science or branch of study.
vijnana Knowledge, judgment, understanding.

Vishnu Second in the Hindu Trinity; the Preserver who incarnates himself in
age after age for the establishment of dharma and for the welfare of all
creatures.
Vivasvat The sun god, the father of Manu, the ancestor of mankind.
Vrishni Name of an important clan of ancient north India. According to
legend the Vrishnis all perished at the end of Krishna’s life when their
city, Dvaraka, sank in the sea.
Vyasa The sage revered as the author of the Mahabharata and the Gita. He
was the father of both Dhritarashtra and Pandu, and he gave Sanjaya
the power of mystic vision so that he could behold the dialogue
between Sri Krishna and Arjuna.
yajna Offering, sacrifice, worship.
Yajur One of the four Vedas.
yoga [from yuj “to unite”] Union with God, realization of the unity of all
life; a path or discipline which leads to such a state of total integration
or unity. Yoga is also the name of one of the six branches of Hindu
philosophy, and as such is paired with Sankhya.
yogi A person who practices spiritual disciplines.
Yudhishthira Arjuna’s elder brother, famous for his adherence to dharma at
all times.
yuga An age or eon. In Hindu cosmology there are four yugas, representing
a steady deterioration in the state of the world from age to age. The
names of the yugas are taken from a game of dice. Krita Yuga is the
age of perfection, followed by Treta Yuga. The incarnation of Sri
Krishna is said to mark the end of the third yuga, Dvapara. We are
living in the fourth and final yuga, Kali, in which the creation reaches
its lowest point. The world goes through 1,000 such yuga-cycles
during one kalpa or Day of Brahma.

Index
A B C D E F
G H I J

K L

M N O P R
S T

U V W

Y

The page numbers in this index refer, of course, to the
printed edition of this book. When you click on one, your
reader will display the text that begins that page in the
printed book. As the screen capacity of your reader is
smaller than a printed page, you may have to scroll down a
screen or more to find the indexed word or phrase.

A
action, see selfless action
adharma, 267
advaita, 26
Agni, 23
ahamkara, 39, 211, 223
ahimsa, 32
ajnana, 147
akasha, 214
Ananta, 181
anger, 87, 102, 103, 126, 221
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 18, 37
Arjuna: background, 15; becomes seeker after truth, 179; concern over how
to act, 99; doubting heart, 114–15; family tragedy, 72, 111; and
Krishna, 15, 19, 21–22, 71–72, 84, 171, 191–93; as man of action, 21,
83, 102; portrayal in Bhagavad Gita, 71–72; real Self, 83–84
Aryan tribes, 16, 23
asat, 245
ashrams, 17
ashvattha, 229

Ashvatthama, 74
asuras, 181, 237
Atman: at climax of meditation, 26; defined, 24; Krishna as, 180, 229; play
on word, 135; relationship to Brahman, 26; as Self, 30; transcended by
Krishna, 229; in Upanishads, 24, 203; see also Self
attachment, 54–55, 61, 87, 101, 114, 123, 153
Augustine, St., 18, 37, 60
avatara, 112
avyakta, 164
avyayam padam, 230
B Top of Index
Bede, St., 7
Bhagavad Gita: about, 9–10, 14, 113; as an Upanishad, 18–19; as book of
choices, 66; chapter-ending formula, 19; contrast with rest of
Mahabharata, 19–20; essence, 48–59; heart of message, 20–21; and
issue of self-mastery, 15, 21; and Kurukshetra, 14–15; multiple gods
in, 23; setting, 15–22; as shruti, 18; as spiritual instruction, 21–22;
types of yoga in, 48–50; way of love in, 204–6
Bhagavan, 71, 179
bhakti, 171
bhakti yoga, 49
Bhima, 72
Bhishma, 15, 73, 74

Brahma, 149, 163–64
Brahman: about, 24; defined, 24, 213; knowledge of, 125; and Om, 245;
and process of death, 160; relationship to Atman, 26; and still mind,
137; union with, 254; in Upanishads, 24, 179, 203–4; and world-tree,
229
brahmarandhra, 160, 161
brahmavidya, 17
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 162
Buddha, 123–24, 126, 137, 203, 212
buddhi, 39
C Top of Index
castes, 253
Catherine of Genoa, St., 56–57
Catherine of Siena, St., 62
cause and effect, see karma
chakras, 160
Chandogya Upanishad, 161
Chesterton, G. K., 60
Christ, 56, 203
Christian mystics, 205; St. Augustine, 18, 37, 60; St. Catherine of Genoa,
56–57; St. Francis of Assisi, 51, 60, 62; St. John of the Cross, 64, 126,
135, 205; St. Paul, 205; St. Teresa of Avila, 62, 126, 192

The Cloud of Unknowing, 205
consciousness: as divine ground of existence, 213; dreaming as state of, 28;
dreamless sleep as state of, 28; human exploration, 8, 10; impact of
selfless work on, 59; Krishna as, 181; in meditation, 26; at moment of
death, 159–61; natural state, 47; and Sankhya, 39–41; and self-will,
53; as setting for Bhagavad Gita, 21–22; and sleep, 28, 35; states of,
28; testing levels of awareness, 26; unitary, 47; waking as state of, 28;
withdrawing from hold on senses, 42; see also mind
cosmology, 44, 164
Cousins, Norman, 63
creation: and Brahman, 229; cycles of regeneration and decay, 112, 163;
and Day of Brahma, 44; and dharma, 24; indivisible, 32; and Krishna,
112, 148, 169; and union of prakriti and Purusha, 148
cyclical universe, 157, 163–64
D Top of Index
Day of Brahma, 44, 163, 164
death: Arjuna’s questions, 158; and Brahman, 160; consciousness at
moment of death, 159–61; and karma, 163; Krishna’s instructions, 36;
and rebirth, 158; role of yogis, 159–60, 161; Upanishad account, 36,
159–60, 161
dehavat, 204
Desai, Mahadev, 50
desire, 52
detachment, 54–55, 60–61, 84, 85, 114, 125, 134, 138
devas, 23, 237, 244

devotion, 112, 193, 203–6, 254; see also bhakti yoga
Dhammapada, 9
dharma, 24, 31–32, 75, 112
dharmakshetra, 67
Dhritarashtra, 72, 73, 255
Dionysius, 204
Donne, John, 32
Drona, 15, 73–74
Duryodhana, 73
dvandva, 181
Dvaraka, 15
E Top of Index
Eckhart, Meister, 18, 56, 58, 65, 126
Eddington, Arthur, 25
ego, 26, 36, 39, 52–53, 57, 87
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 212
evolution, 47, 65
F Top of Index
faith, see shraddha

field of forces, 25, 35, 37, 43, 46, 212
fields, 211, 212, 213
fig tree, 229
forest academies, 17
Francis of Assisi, St., 51, 60, 62
G Top of Index
gambling, 182
Gandhi, Mahatma: and Bhagavad Gita, 10, 14, 20, 60, 75, 86; and
detachment, 54–55; as fully human, 62; and selfless action, 51
Ganges, 180
gayatri, 181
gunas: defined, 43, 44; as fabric of existence, 44–45; and faith, 243, 244–
45; and maya, 150; and personality, 46–47; as qualities of prakriti,
221–23; and Sankhya philosophy, 102–3, 253; transcending, 222–23
guru, 74, 84
H Top of Index
Hastinapura, 73
hatha yoga, 85, 133
hell, 236
Hinduism: dharma and karma in, 31; multiple gods in, 23; multiplicity of
names for aspects of God, 22–23; and path of knowledge, 203; and

path of moderation, 136; proclaims one God, 22; Shiva and Shakti in,
213
holy name, see mantram
Hume, David, 26
Huxley, Aldous, 17
I Top of Index
Indra, 23, 180
Ishvara, 229
J Top of Index
Janaka, 103
Jesus Christ, 56, 203
jiva, 84
jnana, 147, 148
jnana yoga, 48, 50, 101–2
John of the Cross, St., 64, 126, 135, 205
K Top of Index
kala, 193
kama, 86
Kama Sutra, 136

Kapila, 37
karma: about, 33–34; in Bhagavad Gita, 100–101; and consequences of
shraddha, 65; defined, 24; and hell, 236; and process of death, 163;
and rebirth, 170; and selfish attachment, 101, 252; in Upanishads, 24
karma phala, 53, 125, 252
karma yoga: and Bhagavad Gita, 49, 50, 51–52; defined, 49; goal of, 114;
as selfless action, 99–103, 124–25, 134
Katha Upanishad, 230
Kauravas, 72
Kempis, Thomas à, 62
knower of field, 38, 211, 213, 214, 229
knowledge: of Brahman, 125; as fruit of doing, 114; of Self, 60, 124–25;
see also jnana yoga
Krishna: and Arjuna, 15, 19, 21–22, 71–72, 84, 171, 191–93; as Atman,
180, 229; in Bhagavad Gita, 19, 149, 169; as Creator, 148–49; deep
revelation of his divine being, 179–82; divine nature, 112–13, 191–93;
exalted nature, 169–72, 230; home of, 164, 230–31; as Lord, 21; as
name for aspect of God, 23; need for devotion to, 171–72; and prakriti
and Purusha, 148–49; as prana of body, 231; and rebirth, 111–12;
remembering at hour of death, 158–59; and renunciation, 55–56;
reveals divine powers and attributes, 179–82; role in Bhagavad Gita,
15, 19, 71–72; royal secret, 172; as Self, 22, 58, 180, 181, 229;
transcends Atman, 229; “two natures” of, 148; as Vishnu, 192; and
yoga in Bhagavad Gita, 49, 50
kundalini, 136
Kuru dynasty, 13, 71, 72–73
Kurukshetra, 13, 14–15

L Top of Index
lila, 149
lotus, 125, 149
love: of God, 204–6; selfless, 170
M Top of Index
madbhavam, 158
Madhusudana, 237
Mahabharata: basis in actual events, 15; defined, 13; and human good and
evil, 237; Krishna in, 113; and Kurukshetra, 13, 14–15; as metaphor,
21; and morality of war, 75; relationship of Bhagavad Gita to, 14, 18–
20
Mallory, George Leigh, 8
manas, 39
mantram: Krishna as, 181; Om as, 161, 181, 245; Om Tat Sat as, 245
maya: about, 28–30; in Bhagavad Gita, 150; defined, 28, 150; and Krishna,
112, 150; in Rig Veda, 151; in Sankhya philosophy, 150; in Vedanta,
150; and wheel of time, 254
meditation: consciousness in, 26; evidence in Indus Valley, 16; final stage,
26, 192; finding place for, 135–36; and one-pointed mind, 135, 136;
reasons for doing, 134, 205; as samadhi, 125–26; unity within, 26; and
yoga, 134; see also raja yoga
Meera, 126

mind: and change, 25; comparing to flame, 137; as field of forces, 25, 37,
43, 46, 212; in final stage of meditation, 26, 192; at hour of death,
158–59, 160; impact of selflessness on, 53, 59; levels of awareness,
26; making one-pointed, 135, 136; and material elements, 41; and
renunciation, 51; role in directing the soul toward rebirth, 158; and
Sankhya, 37, 39–40; still, 47–48; training, 87, 137–38; see also
consciousness
moha, 150–51
Mohammed, 56, 203
moksha, 24, 30, 126, 252
morality of war, 74–75
Moses, 56, 134
Muhammad, see Mohammed
mukta, 126
N Top of Index
Nakula, 72
nirvana, 30, 52
nirvikalpa samadhi, 192
nishkama karma, 52, 53
O Top of Index
offerings, 114, 171; see also yajna
Om (mantram), 161, 181, 245

Om Tat Sat (mantram), 245
Oppenheimer, Robert, 193
P Top of Index
pada, 230
Pandavas, 72, 73
Patanjali, 133, 159, 192
Paul, St., 205
Perennial Philosophy, 17, 18, 22
physics, 24–25, 29, 37, 44, 164
pipal trees, 229
Prahlada, 181
prakriti: about, 37, 43–44, 56; aspects of, 212; components of, 211; as field,
212, 213; and gunas, 43, 221–23; and karma, 212; nature of, 221–23;
in Sankhya philosophy, 148; union with Purusha, 148
pranas, 160–61, 231
Purusha: defined, 37, 38; as knower, 213; liberation from gunas, 222–23; in
Sankhya philosophy, 148; Shiva as, 214; union with prakriti, 148; in
Upanishads, 151
Purushottama, 179
R Top of Index
raja yoga, 49, 134; see also meditation

rajas: defined, 44, 45; as one of three gunas, 44, 46, 102, 103, 243, 244–45;
as quality of prakriti, 221, 222; transforming tamas into, 47; and work,
253
rakshasas, 244
Rama, 181, 237
Ramakrishna, 126, 147–48
Ramana Maharshi, 126
Ramayana, 181
Ravana, 237
realization, see Self-realization; vijnana
rebirth, 84, 111–12, 170
reincarnation, 35; see also rebirth
renunciation: and Bhagavad Gita, 51, 53–54; defined, 58; as essence of
Bhagavad Gita, 51; and gunas, 252; as path to real peace of mind, 206;
sannyasa type vs. tyaga type, 251–52
Rig Veda, 16, 22, 151, 181, 230
rishis, 17, 24
Rudra, 181
Ruysbroeck, Jan van, 27, 29, 57
S Top of Index
sada, 126

sadhana, 244
sadhu, 136, 172, 212
Sahadeva, 72
samabuddhi, 135
samadhi: Arjuna’s, 191–93; defined, 30; at moment of death, 161;
nirvikalpa, 192; potter’s wheel analogy, 59; savikalpa, 192; as state of
profound meditation, 125–26, 179
samsara, 24, 35, 84, 86
Sanjaya, 74, 255
Sankhya philosophy: about, 37–38; categories of gunas in, 102–3, 253;
defined, 37; and mango analogy, 40; mind and matter, 38–43; prakriti
and Purusha in, 37–38, 148; vs. yoga, 37, 124
sannyasa, 123, 124, 251; see also renunciation
Sanskrit language, 16
sat, 245
sattva: defined, 44, 45; harnessing energy of rajas into, 47; as one of three
gunas, 44, 46, 102, 243, 244; as quality of prakriti, 221, 222; and
spiritual disciplines, 244; and work, 253
savikalpa samadhi, 192
Self: Atman as, 30; at climax of meditation, 26, 48; at conception, 231; and
gunas, 46; and Krishna, 22, 58, 180, 181, 229; relationship to action,
56, 113; see also Atman
self-discipline, 135, 244
Self-knowledge, 60, 125

Self-realization, 58–59, 83–87, 134
self-will, 52–53
selfishness, 51, 102; see also renunciation
selfless action, 51–52, 53, 99, 124–25; see also karma yoga
selfless love (bhakti), 170
selfless service, 57–58, 99–103, 114, 124, 244
senses: as “gates” of body, 160; and sense objects, 41–43; training, 87
Sermon on the Mount, 14, 20, 60
Shakti, 213–14
shama, 134
Shankara, 18, 37, 59, 126, 181
Shaw, Bernard, 62
Shiva, 16, 22, 181, 213, 214
shraddha, 63–65, 243–44
shruti, 18
siddhi, 253–54
soul, see jiva
sudurachara, 172
T Top of Index

tamas: defined, 44, 45; as one of three gunas, 44, 46, 102, 103, 243, 244,
245; as quality of prakriti, 221–22; transforming into rajas, 47; and
work, 253
tanha, 52
tanmatras, 41
tapas, 244–45
Tat, 230, 245
tattvas, 38–43
Teresa of Avila, St., 62, 126, 192
Troy, 15
turiya, 28, 29–30
tyaga, 206, 251–52
U Top of Index
unity: in climax of meditation, 26; discovering, 42; glimpsing, 126; as goal
of evolution, 47; as multiplicity, 29–30; as state of consciousness, 28;
unitive state, 27, 28
universe, cyclical, 157, 163–64
Upanishads: about, 8–9, 23–24; account of death process, 36, 159–60, 161;
as background for Bhagavad Gita, 22–36; discoveries of brahmavidya
in, 17–18; as minimum sources of Hinduism, 18; and Perennial
Philosophy, 18; and pranas, 231; Purusha in, 151; states of
consciousness in, 28; in Vedas, 18; vs. Bhagavad Gita, 22, 203–4
V Top of Index

Varuna, 23, 181
Vasudeva, 182
Vedanta, 150
Vedas, 18, 169–70, 181, 203, 230
vibhutis, 179, 182
vijnana, 147, 148, 150
Vishnu: as Creator, 149; defined, 112; Krishna as, 71, 112, 113, 180, 192;
measuring cosmos, 230; role of Brahma in, 149; Shiva and Shakti, 214
Vrishni, 182
Vyasa, 19, 21, 74, 182, 255
W Top of Index
wheel of time, 254
wisdom, see jnana; vijnana
work, see selfless action
world-tree, 229
worship, see yajna
Y Top of Index
Yadavas, 71
yajna, 57, 114

yoga: and Bhagavad Gita, 22, 48–49; bhakti, 49; central principle, 47;
common meaning, 51; defined, 30, 85, 134; jnana, 48, 50, 101–2;
karma, 49, 50, 51–52, 99–103, 114, 124–25, 134; raja, 49, 134;
significance of word, 56; vs. Sankhya, 124
Yoga, as school of meditation, 37
Yoga, Lord of, 16, 193
yoga psychology, 37–48
Yoga Sutras, 133, 159, 192
Yogeshvara, 16
yogis: in Bhagavad Gita, 133–35; defined, 134; role in process of death,
159–60, 161; true, 135
Yudhishthira, 72, 73
yugas, 164

Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Chapter One
Arjuna’s Despondency
Chapter Two
The Way of Self Knowledge
Chapter Three
The Yoga of Action
Chapter Four
Knowledge of Renouncing Fruits
Chapter Five
Knowledge of Renunciation and Action
Chapter Six
The Path of Meditation
Chapter Seven
Knowledge of the Absolute in Its Entirety
Chapter Eight
Knowledge of the Eternal
Chapter Nine
Knowledge of the Royal and Secret Path
Chapter Ten
The Glorious Manifestations of the Lord
Chapter Eleven
Yogic Vision
Chapter Twelve
The Yoga of Devotion
Chapter Thirteen
Knowledge of the Field and the Knower
Chapter Fourteen
The Profound Knowledge of the Three Gunas

Chapter Fifteen
The Eternal Tree of Life
Chapter Sixteen
The Destiny of the Sages and of the Ignorant
Chapter Seventeen
Three Modes of Conviction
Chapter Eighteen
The Wisdom of Renunciation and Liberation
Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
About the Author

Acknowledgments
The completion of this work would not have been possible without the
generous and untiring assistance of Carol Kingsbury, who spent long hours
typing; Aparna Bharati and Dr. Arpita, who assisted with the editing; and
Anne Morrow, who managed our household in India while we worked on the
commentary. Pandit Usharbudh Arya provided the translation of the Sanskrit
text. The cover photograph was taken by Carol Kingsbury.
Swami Ajaya, a practicing clinical psychologist, acted as consultant
throughout the writing of the book, and his input served to enhance the final
product.

Introduction
The Bhagavad Gita is the fountainhead of Eastern psychology, and this
commentary is designed to draw out its psychological concepts and make
them accessible to all students. These profound psychological insights are
intertwined in the Bhagavad Gita with philosophical concepts, so the task
undertaken here is to separate the psychological principles and to explain
their practical application.
Self-realization is the goal of human life. The purpose of Eastern
religion, philosophy, and psychology is to fulfill that goal. Philosophy as it is
understood in the East is neither a mere speculative exercise nor an
intellectual adventure. The word “philosophy” is a compound of two words:
philo and sophia, which mean “love for knowledge.” But this term is not
applicable in the East, for those who consider the prime questions of life such
as: Who am I? From where have I come? Why have I come? and Where will
I go? are not interested in only the intellectual answers to these questions.
The subject matter of Eastern philosophy leads the student through a
systematic way of directly experiencing the truths of existence and the height
of Self-realization. After realizing one’s real Self, one knows that this Self is
the Self of all.
In the Vedantic tradition the term Brahma Vidya* is used instead of the
term philosophy. It has a different connotation and a deeper meaning than the
word philosophy conveys, and it is unique in its approach to knowledge.
Brahma Vidya means the knowledge that leads one to realize Brahman, the
Self of all. The Bhagavad Gita conveys that wisdom in its entirety and
teaches the practical methods for the study and transformation of one’s inner
being. Philosophy and psychology are thus intermingled. Without the help of
psychology—knowing, analyzing, and learning to use our inner potentials—
we cannot fulfill the goal of human life: Self-realization.
In contrast, Western philosophy is intellectual and deals with man’s
relationship with the universe. With the knowledge he gains, he tries to
understand his status in the universe. In Brahma Vidya, however, one comes

to know all the levels of his being and finally to realize his true Self.
According to the Eastern system, knowing the real Self is the first and
foremost purpose of life. After Self-realization all the mysteries of the
universe and one’s relationship with the universe are revealed. Because of
their contrasting approaches, there is a wide gulf between philosophy and
Brahma Vidya. One is only theoretical, but the other is practical as well.
Though the Bhagavad Gita is composed of only seven hundred verses, it
contains all the principles of the philosophy and psychology of the East.
There are eighteen lessons in the Bhagavad Gita, each describing a different
aspect of the process of self-transformation. This commentary emphasizes the
psychological principles found in each chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. The
sadhana (spiritual practice) described in each section is explained so that
aspirants can help themselves progress in the inward journey and attain the
highest state of bliss. The aim of the Bhagavad Gita is to teach the aspirant
how to establish equanimity both in his internal life and in his activities in the
external world; to help him develop tranquility within, and to explain the art
and science of doing actions skillfully and selflessly.
The teachings of the Bhagavad Gita help one to understand the
distinction between the real Self and the mere self. The mere self is subject to
change and destruction; the real Self is not. The aspirant should understand
both and should finally establish himself in his essential nature: Atman. Then
he can live in the world without being affected by it. In the domain between
the real Self and the mere self lies our antahkarana (internal instrument),
which plays a most important part in both our internal and external life. If not
understood, both goals of life—living in the world and Self-realization—are
defeated. Our psychological life needs profound and deep study if we are to
free ourselves from the quagmire of emotionality, egotistical preoccupations,
and self-delusion and if we are to realize our fullest potentials for the
unfoldment of consciousness.
The perennial psychology of the Bhagavad Gita deals with analyzing
and training the internal processes of the human being so that one becomes
creative in the external world and attains a state of tranquility at the same
time. That which needs detailed analysis, understanding, and unfoldment is
the mental life, which is vast in its characteristics. The outside world can be
mastered only when the inner potentials are systematically explored and
organized. Without understanding one’s inner potentials, it is not possible to
function effectively and harmoniously in the external world, for all things

happen within before they are expressed externally.
The wise man knows the distinction between the real Self and the mere
self, but he still does sadhana so that barriers are not created for either.
Sadhana is for the inner level that creates delusion or mirage; it is not Atman
or the external world that creates confusion but one’s mental life. The internal
and the external are two inseparable aspects of one single life. Practice or
sadhana should be modeled in such a way that it does not lead the aspirant
from one extreme to another. Some aspirants think that retiring from the
world will help them attain the purpose of life. Others believe that doing
actions and performing their duties in the world will fulfill the purpose of
life. It is the moderate path, however, that creates a bridge between these two
extremes and that is the most useful for the general public. This commentary
is neither written specifically for the renunciate nor for those who are
scratching the surface of the mundane world for the sake of their selfexistence, without understanding that if the world is meant for them, they are
also meant for the world. If one is to live life happily, he needs to be aware
that others are also striving to attain happiness. Consideration for others is a
primary requisite for finding happiness and building a good society.
One may wonder why the Bhagavad Gita came into existence when we
already had such scriptures as the Vedas and Upanishads. The great Vedantic
sage Shankara explained, “The Vedic dharma was practiced over a long
time. But eventually discrimination and wisdom declined. Unrighteousness
became more predominant than righteousness.”* The Vedas are the source of
all streams of Indian philosophy and psychology, and the Upanishads are the
later parts of the Vedas. With the decline of discrimination and wisdom, it
became difficult for those who were not scholars to understand the teachings
of the Vedas and Upanishads. So it was necessary to restate these teachings
in a way that could be appreciated and assimilated by all.
The Bhagavad Gita contains in condensed form all the philosophical and
psychological wisdom of the Upanishads. It is said that the Upanishads are
like a cow that Sri Krishna milks to bestow its nurturing wisdom to his dear
friend and disciple, Arjuna. Sri Krishna imparts all the wisdom of the Vedic
and Upanishadic literature through the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita.
Rather than imparting a new trend of thought or expounding a new
philosophy, Sri Krishna modified and simplified the Vedic and Upanishadic
knowledge. He speaks to humanity through his dialogue with Arjuna. The
word Arjuna means “one who makes sincere efforts,” and the word Krishna

means “the center of consciousness.” One who makes sincere efforts
inevitably obtains the knowledge that directly flows from the center of
consciousness.
The unique dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna deals with all
aspects of life. It is useful for modern therapists, psychologists, and
philosophers to study the Bhagavad Gita in order to understand the way Sri
Krishna counsels Arjuna. Arjuna, like many patients who seek therapy, is in a
state of despair and feels unable to cope with the situation before him, so he
seeks Sri Krishna’s advice and guidance. But there are major differences in
the way Sri Krishna treats Arjuna and the approaches used by
psychotherapists today. Modern psychotherapists attempt to help the client
modify his conscious attitudes and unconscious processes and behaviors, but
their analysis lacks the depth and profundity found in the Bhagavad Gita.
Most modern therapists do not explore the purpose and meaning of life. They
are loath to discuss and give advice on basic philosophical issues such as
activism verses pacifism, one’s duty in life, and the nature of life and death.
They limit the depth and range of counseling and focus primarily on bringing
out the patient’s complex. Most modern psychologists do not go to the root of
the problem but analyze it without understanding the fundamental cause.
They deal with specific problems and symptoms, and the untouched cause
then expresses its agony in different ways. They work in this way because of
lack of time and fear of becoming involved with the unknown.
By contrast, Sri Krishna presents a philosophical foundation for
understanding the purpose of life and the way to live harmoniously, and he
offers Arjuna practical advice on living and on coping with the world. In
Eastern psychology the teacher helps the student plan a self-training program
and observes all the possible hindrances that may rise to the surface. In
Eastern psychology the whole being is treated—the focus is not merely on
the obvious problem. The Eastern method leads one to become a therapist for
himself. The path of sadhana is perfect and profound.
Modern psychology is still in an evolving state; it is not a finished
product as yet. Counselors and therapists play an important role in society,
but many of them lack the depth and insight to adequately analyze and advise
their patients. They lack self-confidence and are insecure. Because of that, the
counselor is unable to guide the client effectively toward the resolution of his
problems. Counseling is a very noble profession, but it is taken too lightly. It
is often practiced by erratic and egotistical people who are not interested in

developing themselves but who are only interested in teaching. The same
problem exists with those modern gurus who can theoretically explain but do
not ever practice. Therapists and gurus can be more dangerous than anyone
else when they exploit the innocence of others. We must find a way to keep
this noble heritage and this wonderful profession from degeneration. It is
through sadhana (spiritual practice) alone that one can come in touch with his
inner Self. Without that, trying to help others is like building a castle in the
sand: it will crumble in the first rain shower.
In the Bhagavad Gita, the protagonist Arjuna is a most brilliant sadhaka
(one who follows the spiritual path) and warrior. He had been trained to
skillfully fight the battles of life, yet even he becomes confused like any other
person. According to the Bhagavad Gita, confusion can lead to serious
conflict, and if the conflict seems unresolvable, one can lose all incentive and
become desolate. The purpose of his life will then remain unfulfilled. Like
many clients in psychotherapy, Arjuna is not at first receptive to the guidance
of his preceptor, Sri Krishna. In the second chapter, after his initial arguments
with Sri Krishna, Arjuna finally begins to listen to the teachings imparted to
him. It is important to stress here that modern therapists and teachers need to
establish rapport with their clients and students, who will be more receptive
to advice when a sincere and friendly atmosphere is created.
According to the Bhagavad Gita, Atman (the real Self or center of
consciousness) is never-changing, everlasting, eternal, and infinite, whereas
the body is constantly changing and prone to decay. Between the body and
Atman is the mental life, which needs to be understood in its totality. The
antahkarana should be understood, analyzed, and trained to allow the light of
Atman to be expressed and to enable one to live in the world while remaining
undisturbed by worldly fetters. After explaining both the immortal and mortal
aspects of existence, the Bhagavad Gita describes all aspects of yoga
psychology.
Atman cannot be known in the same way we usually know something,
that is, as an object to be perceived, understood, or acquired. For Atman
already exists and is the source of all of one’s knowledge. It is the basis of
knowing rather than an object to be known. That which is the subject matter
to be known is our mental life and the way we should function in the world.
All the systematic efforts and practices described in the Bhagavad Gita are
means to organize the internal life so that human beings can attain a state of
tranquility and thus become useful to themselves and others. The psychology

of the Bhagavad Gita leads the student first to awareness of the center of
consciousness, then to training that focuses on the understanding and mastery
of one’s internal states, and lastly to the skillful and selfless performance of
actions in the external world. Comprehension and knowledge of Atman are
essential to fully understand the internal state of mental life. And without an
understanding of the various aspects of one’s mental life, coordination
between mind, senses, breath, and body is impossible. So knowledge of
Atman in itself is not enough: application of this knowledge is paramount.
It is Atman alone that gives light to the prime faculty of our internal
being called buddhi (intellect). Buddhi has three main functions:
discrimination, judgment, and decision. In Western psychology these three
qualities of buddhi are considered to be aspects of the ego. In other words
they are intimately connected with one’s limited, subjective sense of I; it is
“I” who discriminates, judges, and decides. Eastern psychology, however,
shows that these three functions of the intellect are distinct from the ego. That
is, they are not necessarily connected with one’s limited, subjective sense of
I. In this view the powers of discrimination, judgment, and decision need not
be expressed within the more circumscribed perspective of one’s ego.
No action can be performed without the help of the mind: all the actions
and speech of a human being are governed by the mind. Therefore that which
needs the most attention in developing a practical way of living is our mental
life. Training the mind means making the mind free from all complexes, and
in sadhana all the faculties of mind are trained in a unified way. This is
important because one-sided progress is exactly like knowing half a truth,
which is not a truth at all.

Commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita
There are many ancient and revered commentaries on the Bhagavad
Gita, each of which has a unique emphasis. The most prominent are those of
Shankara, Ramanuja, and Madhva. The most ancient commentary on the
Bhagavad Gita known to the modern world is that of Shankara (A.D. 788820). He refers to still earlier commentaries, but they are not available.
According to Shankara the Bhagavad Gita leads one beyond action and
beyond all the distinctions of the phenomenal world to the realization of the

Absolute. Shankara views the Bhagavad Gita as an expression of Advaita
philosophy, and he uses the Bhagavad Gita to support his assertion that there
is only one Reality without a second. His commentary emphasizes the
identity of the Self with Brahman as the only Reality. In his view the
phenomenal world is illusory, and taking it to be real creates bondage and
suffering. Only direct knowledge of the ultimate Reality can bring freedom.
Though selfless actions help to purify the mind, ultimately one goes beyond
action and renounces all involvements in the mundane world.
Ramanuja’s commentary (eleventh century A.D.) emphasizes the
devotional aspect of the Bhagavad Gita. Ramanuja interpreted the Bhagavad
Gita in accordance with his dualistic philosophy, rejecting the view that the
Self and Brahman are identical. His commentary argues against the
renunciation of action and asserts that the phenomenal world is real rather
than illusory, although it is totally dependent on God. In Ramanuja’s view
God is not beyond form (nirguna) but is a personal being with form (saguna).
God is immanent within every human being, but the human being always
remains distinct from God. According to Ramanuja the Bhagavad Gita
teaches that devotion to Vishnu is the highest path. Madhva’s commentary
(thirteenth century A.D.) also interprets the Bhagavad Gita from a dualistic
framework and criticizes the monistic view that there is only one
Consciousness. He asserts that devotion is the only means for attaining
liberation, and he attempts to show that the Bhagavad Gita supports his view.
Of the many twentieth century commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita, a
small number are widely read and respected. Each of these has a unique
emphasis. In the first half of this century, a number of those who led India to
independence from alien rule wrote commentaries that focus on karma yoga.
Tilak, a prominent leader in India’s quest for independence, asserts in his
Gita Rahasya that the Bhagavad Gita emphasizes karma yoga. Tilak stresses
the importance of undertaking action, not for personal reward but based on
selflessness. Mahatma Gandhi also wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad
Gita that stresses action based on truth, non-violence, and selflessness. The
commentary by his follower Vinobha emphasizes “actionless action,” that
action which combines action with renunciation.
Sri Aurobindo wrote a collection of essays which assert that the
Bhagavad Gita offers a synthesis or integration of the various paths of yoga,
notably jnana yoga, karma yoga, and bhakti yoga—the yogas of knowledge,
action, and devotion, respectively. Aurobindo attempted to reconcile the

dualistic and non-dualistic interpretations of the Bhagavad Gita. Krishna
Prem, an Englishman who lived in the Himalayas as a yogi during the later
part of his life, contributed a commentary that has given insight into the
symbolic significance of the Bhagavad Gita. He emphasizes that the battle is
taking place within between the negative forces of greed, selfishness, and
desire and the noble qualities of the human being that can lead to Selfrealization.
One of the most thorough and meticulous commentaries is the fourvolume work of Satwalekar. His commentary makes many comparisons
between the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads and other scriptures. He
refers to previous commentaries and presents detailed discussions of the fine
points of many verses. Since he was a practicing yogi as well as a great
scholar, he was able to bring out many subtleties in his translation and
commentary that are missed by other translators and commentators.
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan has written a well-known commentary that is
primarily philosophical in nature. He often refers to previous commentaries,
particularly that of Shankara, and to relevant passages in the Upanishads.
However, he does not give much insight into the practical application of the
teachings of the Bhagavad Gita. The present commentary is unique in
emphasizing the practical application of the many facets of the Bhagavad
Gita’s teachings. It does not exclusively emphasize action, devotion, or
renunciation but delves into the way in which each of the paths and practices
described in the Bhagavad Gita may be utilized to attain the Absolute.

Historical Background of the Bhagavad Gita
The Bhagavad Gita is unique among philosophical and psychological
teachings, for it begins as two great armies confront one another at the start of
a battle, and the teachings continue for eighteen days in the midst of the
battlefield. Most Western readers who read this scripture for the first time
become confused by the first chapter, which describes the battlefield, for
there is no introduction to inform the reader of the cause of the war and who
the protagonists are. Many readers are not aware that they are reading a
scripture from the longest epic poem in the world, eight times longer than the
Iliad and Odyssey combined. The Bhagavad Gita is a mere seven hundred

verses out of the one hundred thousand verses of the Mahabharata. If the
reader were familiar with the Mahabharata, the events of the first chapter
would be easily understood rather than being enigmatic. But without knowing
what came before, the reader will be confused and will not fully appreciate
Sri Krishna’s counsel.
The Mahabharata records all the events leading up to the battle, explains
the battle itself, and tells what came after. These events are said to have taken
place some five thousand years ago, but for our purposes the epic’s historical
authenticity is not important, for we are concerned with the profound
psychological insights conveyed in the Bhagavad Gita. The Mahabharata is a
source of great wisdom about how to conduct one’s life skillfully and
harmoniously, and it should be studied as a work of profound insight into
psychological functioning. A brief sketch of it is provided here in order to
clarify the context of the Bhagavad Gita.
Dhritarashtra is the eldest son in a royal family. Ordinarily he would
have become king, but since he had been born blind, his younger brother
Pandu assumed the throne. In time Pandu had five sons, of whom Arjuna, the
protagonist in the Bhagavad Gita, is the second. Dhritarashtra had one
hundred sons, the eldest of whom was Duryodhana. The war is between the
sons of Pandu, the Pandavas, and their cousins, the sons of Dhritarashtra,
who are called the Kauravas. Duryodhana is the leader of the Kauravas, and
Arjuna leads the army of the Pandavas.
Pandu died at an early age, so his five sons grew up under the care of
their uncle Dhritarashtra, who usurped the throne. All the cousins were
brought up together in the same household and had the same teachers, the
most notable of whom were Bhishma and Drona. Dhritarashtra favored his
sons over his nephews, and he tolerated their wicked acts. But the sons of
Pandu had many outstanding qualities: they were virtuous, superior in
archery, and favored by the elders. Thus Duryodhana became envious of
them.
Yudhishthira, the firstborn of the Pandavas, is the rightful heir to the
throne, but Duryodhana conceived several plots to kill his cousins and to send
them into exile so that he could become the king instead. For example, he
built a palace made of wax for his cousins. This was extremely flammable,
and when he thought they were asleep it was set afire. But as a result of
divine intervention, Arjuna and his brothers escaped. Duryodhana also tried
to poison and drown the Pandavas but failed. Twice appealing to

Yudhishthira’s sense of honor, Duryodhana goaded him into a crooked game
of dice. The first time Yudhishthira lost the entire kingdom, but it was soon
restored to the Pandavas. On the second occasion Yudhishthira was again
cheated, and lost. As a result the five brothers were not allowed to enter the
kingdom for twelve years, during which time they went to the forest where
they led an austere and spiritual life. After twelve years of exile, they were
permitted to return to the kingdom, but it was required that they live
unknown and in disguise for one year. If their identity were discovered, they
would be exiled again.
As with all of the Mahabharata, these events are symbolic, for the
Mahabharata is not merely a story concerning a historical event. It is
symbolic of the inner process of self-transformation and Self-realization. The
entire epic explains through symbols the sequential stages in that process and
the experiences that one must undergo in the heroic journey of self-discovery.
For instance, a period of exile in which one lives in the wilderness and
purifies oneself in preparation for spiritual awakening is a common theme
that occurs in history, myths, and initiation ceremonies throughout the world.
For example, consider Jesus’ forty days in the wilderness before returning to
Jerusalem, Moses’ retreat to the mountain for forty days before receiving the
Ten Commandments, and Buddha’s prolonged period of meditation under the
bodhi tree before he was enlightened.
Once the Pandavas successfully completed their trial, they sought to
have their kingdom restored, but Duryodhana would not give them their legal
and moral rights. The Pandavas would have been content with a small village
for each brother, but Duryodhana told them that he would not even allow
them as much land as could be placed on the point of a needle. The Pandavas
tried every means to avoid fighting to regain their rights, but the battle was
forced on them. The war was not fought merely to regain mundane wealth
and power but was in fact a war between the just and unjust, between good
and evil.
Symbolically the armies represent the positive and negative forces
functioning within the human heart and mind. The battle is waged to decide
whether the positive or the negative forces govern the city of life within the
human being. There is a constant battle going on within each person to regain
the lost kingdom of peace, happiness, and bliss. Duryodhana and his ninetynine brothers represent the evil desires that exist within each human being,
whereas the five Pandavas represent the virtuous and noble qualities. When

one’s reason is blinded by evil designs, it is impossible for him to live
peacefully in the world. The Pandavas tried their best to solve the serious
problem that arose as a result of the unjust and unrighteous ways of
Duryodhana. Finally there was no choice left for the Pandavas but to decide
to fight with full will and determination.
As the two sides began gathering their armies, both went to Sri Krishna
and sought his support, for he possessed the strongest army, as well as being
revered as the wisest teacher and the greatest yogi on the earth. Both
Duryodhana and Arjuna requested Sri Krishna to support them in fighting the
war. Sri Krishna, the center and source of all consciousness, wisdom, and
knowledge, offered to give his vast armies to one of them and to become the
chariot driver and counselor for the other. Duryodhana chose Sri Krishna’s
vast army, for he was greedy and materially oriented. Arjuna preferred to
have Sri Krishna as his counselor and guide. Before the battle, Sanjaya,
considered to be a wise counselor, was sent to the Pandavas’ camp in order to
confuse them and weaken their resolve. He tried to dissuade them from
fighting, but disappointed that they did not agree to call off the war, he
returned to Dhritarashtra, the blind father of Duryodhana.
At the start of the Bhagavad Gita, the two armies are facing one another
on the field of Kurukshetra, and the battle is about to begin. Dhritarashtra is
standing on a hill with Sanjaya overlooking the battleground, and he requests
Sanjaya to narrate all that is taking place on the battlefield. The first chapter
of the Bhagavad Gita offers a glimpse into those who are taking part in the
battle and sets the stage for the dialogue between Arjuna and his preceptor,
Sri Krishna.

Chapter One
Arjuna’s Despondency

Dhritarashtra asked
1. What did my sons and the sons of Pandu do, O Sanjaya, gathered
together on the battlefield of righteousness, Kurukshetra, with the intent to
fight?
The first chapter is prefatory. Dhritarashtra, the blind king, is standing
on a hill overlooking the battlefield. In his anxiety, the unrighteous and unjust
Dhritarashtra wants to know what is happening. So he asks his counselor and
charioteer, Sanjaya, to describe the scene to him. Sanjaya, the narrator of the
Bhagavad Gita, is a man of special attainments. He has inner vision and is
able to describe exactly what is taking place even though he is far away.
Sanjaya thus gives Dhritarashtra a complete account of what is happening on
the battlefield.
Ignorant and unjust people are spiritually blind. Because of their selfish
way of life, they do not accept reality. Dhritarashtra usurped the kingdom of
the innocent and righteous, refusing to hand over the lawful rights of his
nephews. In every family, society, or organization the elders must give the
younger members their proper rights. When that is not done, frustration
develops and creates a reaction in the minds of those whose rights have been
snatched unjustly.
People forget that their span of life in this transitory world is brief and
should be utilized to perform those actions that are helpful on the path to

enlightenment rather than to perform actions that will create further bondage.
Self-realization is the ultimate goal of life. Not realizing that fact, the
ignorant waste the precious moments of life that could be utilized for spiritual
progress and for the benefit of others. Selfishness contracts the personality
rather than allowing it to expand to universal awareness. Ignorant people like
Dhritarashtra live only for themselves and do not show consideration for
others.
Arjuna was aware that without profound knowledge of the Eternal,
external and mundane power and wealth are not at all helpful in fulfilling the
purpose of life. The central theme of life is to awake, arise, and gain
knowledge. If that is not constantly remembered, one becomes lost in the
jungle of the external world. One should always be aware of the purpose of
life, for it is only awareness of the Eternal that prevents one from being
dissipated and distracted by the charms and temptations of the world. When a
student like Arjuna constantly remains in contact with his teacher, and a
competent teacher like Sri Krishna is teaching him, liberation becomes easy
and is attained here and now.

Sanjaya replied
2. King Duryodhana, seeing the force of the Pandavas deployed in battle
formation, approached his preceptor, Drona, and addressed him in these

words:
3. O Preceptor, see this great army of the sons of Pandu deployed in
battle formation by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.
4. Here are brave men like Bhima and Arjuna, with their great bows,
intent upon war; Yuyudhana, Virata, and Drupada, each commanding
eleven thousand chariots.
5. Dhrishtaketu; Chekitana; the virile King of Kashi; Purujit
Kuntibhoja; and Shaibya, the bull among men.
6. Here are the strident Yudhamanyu; the virile Uttamaujas;
Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra; and the five sons of Draupadi, all of
them great commanders.
Duryodhana sees the army of the Pandavas ready to fight and takes note
of its great leaders. He describes their qualities to Drona, his general and
teacher in the art of military affairs. Bhima and Arjuna are the foremost
leaders of the Pandava army; along with their brothers, they represent the
virtuous aspects of life. Yudhishthira, the eldest of the brothers, represents
righteousness; Bhima is a symbol of strength undisturbed in all conditions.
Arjuna is the greatest of all warriors; he has both inner wisdom and external
strength. Nakula is able to attain inner peace. Without such peace and
tranquility, one cannot have presence of mind. Sahadeva has wisdom that
comes from faithfulness, sincerity, and one-pointedness. The five brothers
create a unique team, for their qualities are complementary.
In this righteous battle of life, Duryodhana, the eldest of the one hundred
sons of Dhritarashtra, leads the negative forces. He is an evil, destructive, and
unjust leader. On the other side the five Pandava brothers collectively
represent the positive qualities that already live as a treasure within each
person. Both the positive and negative forces remain dormant within every
human heart, and their characteristics are totally adverse to one another. The
negative forces are numerous, shallow, seemingly powerful, misleading, and
distracting. Though individually each is very powerful, they conflict with one
another and so lack collective power and a sense of unification. Because the
Pandavas are well organized, methodical, balanced, and aware of the truth,
they will finally become victorious though they are few in number.
A human being need not waste his time and energy gathering great
means to fulfill the purpose of life. He can live with few means if he knows
how to utilize those few means correctly and at the right time. That skill is

developed as one learns to coordinate his different faculties and modifications
of mind. It results from sincere efforts made by the aspirant to develop full
clarity of mind, which is the very basis of actions performed successfully in
the external world. Mind and action are virtually one and the same: one is a
seed and the other a plant that bears flowers and fruit.
It is important for one to be aware of both his strengths and his
weaknesses, for without such awareness, success in life remains a mere
dream. An aspirant should first learn to strengthen the faculty of
discrimination and judgment. That faculty enables him to recognize both sets
of qualities as they exist within himself: those that inspire him to attain his
goal and those that create barriers for him and dissipate his will power. Every
sadhaka should first learn to examine and be aware of those two factors.
The strength of the Kauravas lies in material might. Their army is much
larger, and they have the best weapons and a great treasury to supply their
needs. Bhishma and Drona are great military leaders and have never been
defeated in battle. In terms of material strength, the Pandavas are inferior in
every way, but the Kauravas have a great weakness: their side is in the wrong
and is spiritually and morally corrupt. The Pandavas, by contrast, are far
superior in spiritual and moral strength. Bhishma and Drona believe that their
duty is to fight on the side of the Kauravas, who hold the throne, but they are
aware that their side is unjust. Though they are sure to fight with honor, their
hearts and sense of justice lie with the Pandavas.
A strong army that lacks moral courage is not capable of successfully
fighting a war, for inner courage is the very center of that strength which
motivates one toward concentrated effort. A king or hero who possesses the
strongest army but does not have moral courage will finally be defeated. But
the army that is fighting for a just cause and has moral courage and inner
strength to support it will be victorious.
One whose mind is imbalanced due to a lack of moral courage can use
brute force to support his ideas, but he can never remain in peace and
happiness. What good is life when one is torn by anxiety, which weakens his
inner strength? Such a person experiences defeat in fighting the battle of life,
although he has many external means to support him.
Parents play a significant role in shaping the lives of their children, and
thus the sons of Dhritarashtra follow in the footsteps of their unjust father.
When parents are greedy, egotistical, conniving, and unjust, their children
consciously and unconsciously develop the same characteristics. Human

society suffers as a result of self-created misery because the elders do not
realize that children trained in an unjust atmosphere will also become unjust.
As one rotten fish pollutes the whole pool, so one man can mislead an entire
society. Therefore a king or leader should be righteous and just and should
stand as an example for others to follow. Dhritarashtra is the antithesis of
such an example.
Many great civilizations have been destroyed by foolish, selfish, and
greedy leaders. For instance, Nero was delighted to see his kingdom burning,
and in the second world war Hitler was obsessed by war hysteria and became
imbalanced, thinking of nothing but killing and destroying other nations.
Many examples of such atrocities committed by kings and leaders in the past
and present could be cited. Why do we forget that this world is a field of
action and that if we learn to perform our actions skillfully and righteously,
our journey will become a perennial song?

7. Now, O Drona, the best of the twice-born, learn of those who are
distinguished among us, the leaders of my army. I tell you of them so that
you may recognize them.
8. Yourself, Bhishma, Kama, and Kripa, conquerors and victorious ones;
Ashvatthama, Vikarna, the son of Somadatta, and Jayadratha.
9. And many other brave men ready to sacrifice their lives for my sake,
they who attack with many weapons, and all of them experts at the art and
science of combat.
Chapters 164 through 171 of the Mahabharata give a detailed
description of the warriors who are participating in the battle. The foremost
commanders of Duryodhana’s army are Drona and Bhishma, who are revered
as generals of unparalleled skill; Kama is also a great warrior on

Duryodhana’s side. Duryodhana calls them “conquerors and victorious ones,”
and others are also mentioned who are ready to die for him. Duryodhana is
confident that he has highly skilled and powerful generals in his army.
Although these generals are very old, they are strong and skilled in the art
and science of combat, knowing all the strategies of battle. Bhishma is one
hundred and seventy years old, and Drona is ninety years old, but despite
their ages these veterans fight fiercely.
The modern mind might take these ages as an exaggeration in the same
way that everyone used to laugh at scientists when they began preparing to go
to the moon. There is nothing that is impossible, however, for one who
practices samyama (self-discipline) on all levels. It amazes the modern mind
that the ancients knew the methods of prolonging the span of life and led a
healthy life of more than one hundred and twenty years. The way in which
they used to think, eat, and practice discipline kept them both healthy and
wise, but we do not find such examples in our modern world. Today there are
people who live ninety to one hundred years and occasionally up to one
hundred and fifteen years, but they remain bedridden invalids and are usually
senile. This clearly shows that our lives are not correctly organized; we have
forgotten the secrets by which we can arrest the aging process. Bhishma and
Drona were great yogis who knew the secrets of perpetual youth as well as
the technique of dying. They could drop their bodies willfully, according to
their desire. As a result of technological attainments, modern man has been
able to acquire the means for living comfortably, but external comfort
without inner strength is not enough for one to lead a healthy and useful life.
If we read the conclusion of the Mahabharata, we will find that Drona
and Bhishma, the greatest of all warriors, lose the war because in their heart
of hearts, they know that they are fighting for an unjust cause. One who does
not do his duty wholeheartedly and with full attention is not successful.
Drona and Bhishma fight for Duryodhana because of their loyalty to the
King, but their hearts are with the Pandavas. In such a serious division of
loyalties within and without, it is not possible to win a battle, whether that
battle is taking place within oneself or in the external world. When one acts
in a manner contradictory to what he feels and thinks, he becomes
disoriented. In such instances, neither success in the external world nor peace
within is possible.
The first task for a seeker of truth is to understand the words
“coordinated effort.” This means that one should always follow the dictates

of his conscience; he should not do anything that does not agree with his
conscience. When a normal human being considers doing something, his
conscience helps him to choose what he will do by placing the consequences
of his actions—good and bad, helpful and damaging, right and wrong—in
front of him. And if he has a firm will, he will be able to carry out the action
he chooses. Samkalpa shakti (will power) is a powerful force in the human
being. If it is not utilized, there will always be failure, regardless of the
external efforts made and the means applied. True sadhakas are taught to be
vigilant, to not allow the light of samkalpa shakti to be diminished or
extinguished. If the knowledge of that light is protected and allowed to grow,
the aspirant becomes self-reliant, and self-reliance is an essential virtue. Selfreliance, courage, a one-pointed mind, and determination all unite to build the
force of samkalpa shakti, without which the aspirant cannot fearlessly tread
the path of life.

10. This force of ours supervised by Bhishma, is large but inadequate;
however, the force of these (Pandavas) supervised by Bhima, is small but
adequate.
Although Duryodhana has superior strength, he has an inferiority
complex that shows itself in his jealous feelings toward the Pandavas. He
knows he is fighting a war for unjust and unrighteous motives. When
enveloped in selfishness, even the mightiest cannot be victorious, for inner
strength alone motivates one to successfully fight in the battlefield of life and
to skillfully perform his actions and duties. By contrast, selfish motivation
weakens the will and inner strength. One who is selfishly motivated cannot
persuade the conscience, which judges one’s intentions before he decides to
act, to take his side. Such a human being continually creates a division within
himself by ignoring his conscience and continuing to follow the path of
unrighteousness. He knows what truth is, but his actions are motivated by
selfishness, greed, and possessiveness. Duryodhana’s situation is exactly like
that: his inner strength is weakened by the division he has created within
himself. Although Duryodhana has the stronger army and skilled generals, he
is unsure of his victory.

When a king suffers from an inferiority complex, he may act as though
he is superior, but such a person actually feels inadequate underneath his
false show of bravado. There is no such thing as a superiority complex: there
is only one complex, and that is inferiority. When one is aware of his
weaknesses but does not know how to rid himself of them, he creates a shield
for his protection; when one does not want to accept and confront his
weaknesses, he puts on a false front and acts as though he is superior. Such
people actually think they are superior to others because they have not
learned to accept things as they are. A sense of superiority is like a house of
cards that can crumble at the touch of a finger.
Everyone has weaknesses. Wise is he who acknowledges his
weaknesses and works steadily to remove them and to replace them with the
essential virtues that strengthen him and make him brave, fearless, and
truthful. There is always a war between the forces of virtue and vice.
Weakness may appear to be strong because it persistently resists accepting
and acknowledging its reverse side. Virtue, however, has genuine strength
because it is a product of a balanced mind. Weakness arises from imbalance,
whereas balance is the true source of strength.
Even though Duryodhana has the most powerful army and the best
generals, still he lacks confidence. And when one is not sure of himself, it is
difficult for him to be victorious. Confidence comes from inner strength,
from the inner conscience that constantly judges one’s thoughts, feelings,
desires, and motivations. One’s conscience protects him from the traps laid
by his weaknesses.

11. Standing according to your assignments in the divisions and at all the
major entry points of the battle formation, all of you should surround and
protect the commander-in-chief, Bhishma, alone.
Why does Bhishma, the leader of Duryodhana’s army, need protection?
Because if the commander of the army is lost, the war will be lost. Bhishma,
however, has a special power: no man can kill him. It is difficult to believe
that anyone who is born is not subject to death, and Bhishma, though very
powerful and skillful, is no exception. Among the many fears of Duryodhana

is the fear of losing Bhishma, and that fear prompts him to order his army to
protect Bhishma with all its might. It is fear that creates defenses and
consumes a vital part of one’s energy that could be used in positive ways.
Although Bhishma is fighting for/Duryodhana, it is not with fullheartedness: Bhishma’s and Drona’s loyalty to Duryodhana is merely
superficial and external. They fight with the knowledge that Duryodhana’s
cause is unjust. These two great warriors know that Duryodhana will be
defeated no matter how much resistance he presents and regardless of the
fortifications he is able to create with the help of his brute strength.
Energy and strength exist in many forms and have varied expressions.
For example, electricity can be used both for cooling and heating, and a
person’s energy can likewise be used for either creativity or destruction. It
depends on what one chooses and how much skill one has in using his
energy. Duryodhana is very powerful, but his power is destructive. The
Pandavas, in contrast, represent that stream of energy that is creative and
leads one to the source of consciousness.

12. Causing Duryodhana great joy, the elder of the Kurus, the
grandfather Bhishma, a man of splendor, loudly roaring a lion roar, blew
the conch.

13. Then conches, kettle drums, tabors, drums, and trumpets suddenly
blared forth, and that sound was tumultuous.
14. Then, standing in a great chariot drawn by white horses, Krishna and
Arjuna also blew their celestial conches.
15. Krishna, the Lord of Senses, blew his conch, named Panchajanya,
and Arjuna, the Winner of Wealth, blew his conch, named Devadatta;
Bhima, he of fierce deeds, blew his great conch, named Paundra.
16. King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew the conch Ananta-vijaya;
Nakula and Sahadeva blew their conches, named Sughosha and Manipushpaka respectively.
17. And the King of Kashi, the excellent archer, as well as Shikhandi, the
great charioteer, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and the unconquerable Satyaki.
18. Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, each and every one, O King, the
mighty-armed son of Subhadra—they all blew their conches, each his own.
The leaders of both armies blow their conches, and the armies beat their
drums and blow their trumpets to inspire their own soldiers. First
Duryodhana’s army creates a fierce sound to terrorize the Pandavas, but the
Pandavas’ army returns a mighty sound with full confidence. The gestures
and sounds that are created to frighten the opposition have two possible
origins: fear and confidence. When human beings are frightened, they do not
create music but frightful sounds. Sri Krishna and Arjuna, who are confident
of their strength, create a melodic sound. In fact, the whole of the Bhagavad
Gita is a dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna that creates a beautiful
melody, a divine song. The sounds created by Duryodhana’s drummers are
violent; they are created out of excitement, fear, and anxiety. Their sound
does not compose any poetry or song, for it has its origin in the destructive
aspect of Shakti, the primal force that resides within. That primal force has
two aspects: one is merciful, gentle, and kind; the other is cruel, brutal, and
annihilating. The war represents the inner conflict between the annihilating
and merciful powers within each person.

19. The tumultuous, reverberating sound tore the hearts of the sons of
Dhritarashtra, echoing all around the heaven and earth.

The fierce sounds of the Pandavas’ conches frighten Duryodhana and
magnify his feelings of guilt. Guilty is he who does not acknowledge his
mistakes, for he does not believe in being corrected and is not open to helpful
suggestions from any quarter. He neither listens to the voice of his conscience
nor to the advice of his counselors. He closes all the doors of learning,
isolating himself in the fortress of his own egotistical views. He does not
want to know anything, and he goes on feeding his ego by creating a false
reality for himself.

20. Now, Arjuna, the son of Pandu, who had Hanuman as the emblem
on his flag, seeing the sons of Dhritarashtra standing well organized as the
weapons had begun to be hurled, raised his bow.
In the Ramayana, a more ancient epic than the Mahabharata, Hanuman
plays a vital role in defeating the demon, Ravana. Hanuman is one of the
greatest symbols used by warriors, for he had enormous strength. In the
Mahabharata, the symbol of Hanuman also plays a prominent role. The flag
that is hoisted on Arjuna’s chariot has a monkey, the symbol of Hanuman, on
it, and this inspires Arjuna’s army and terrifies the army of his enemies.
Hanuman was the greatest of all devotees, a sadhaka and a brahmachari with
single-pointed devotion for Lord Rama. Hanuman’s one-pointed devotion
gave him unparalleled strength and assurance of attaining his goal. The wise
teacher encourages his students to develop such one-pointedness.
Arjuna’s devotion is exactly like that of Hanuman. He is with his lord
and guide, Sri Krishna, all the time. He is learning to apply all his resources
with full sincerity and might. That is why he is called Arjuna, “one who
makes sincere efforts.” In preparing for the war, the symbol of Hanuman on
Arjuna’s flag inspires him and helps him to be confident. He knows that he is
fighting a just war and that the greatest of yogis is his teacher. His selfconfidence is enormous, but as we shall soon see, Arjuna is about to lose all
his confidence and become despondent.
How is it possible for one to confidently prepare himself for a fierce
battle and then fall into a state of despondency in such a short time? We see
here that a human being, no matter how positive he feels, can slip down to the

valley of sorrow as a result of a single thought that draws his attention to the
body, which is weak.
Even after attaining samadhi (a state of transcendent consciousness in
which all of one’s questions are answered), one comes down from the height
of tranquility, for even the practice of samadhi is done in the cage of human
limitation. When we study the lives of great spiritual leaders, we find that a
moment comes when they are swayed from their heights and become
absorbed in body identification. For example, Buddha decided to follow the
path of renunciation and left his family. Nonetheless he soon returned home
to see his infant child once more, but then he remembered his resolve and
again rushed back toward the Rajgiri forest.
Realistically one should understand that although the highest call of life
is the inner urge to know the Ultimate, the call of the charms and temptations
of the external world is very powerful and can create obstacles on the path.
Therefore a sadhaka should not be proud or complacent about what he has
attained. Even to the last breath of sadhana, attachments to the world and to
relationships are prone to disturb the sadhaka.

21. Then, O King Dhritarashtra, Arjuna addressed these words to
Krishna, Lord of the Senses: ‘O Steadfast One, place my chariot between
both armies,
22. While I observe these who are standing here with whom I am about

to fight in this battle,
23. I would like to see these who have gathered here to fight, who are
desirous of doing the wishes of the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra in
battle.’
24. Then, O Descendant of Bharata, thus addressed by Arjuna, the
Conqueror of Sleep, Krishna, Lord of the Senses, having placed the best of
the chariots between both armies,
25. In front of Bhishma and Drona and of all the kings, said, ‘O Son of
Pritha, see all these Kauravas gathered together.’
Arjuna requests Sri Krishna to drive his chariot between the two armies
so that he can observe the strength of the enemy and at the same time
estimate the strength of his own army. The aspirant who lacks a keen sense of
observation is not aware of his strengths and weaknesses and thus can be
swayed by his imbalanced emotions. In the same way that Arjuna prepares
for war, the aspirant should prepare himself before he starts to tread the path
of sadhana. If the sadhaka is not prepared to tread the path of sadhana,
disease, despair, fear, and depression will create obstacles for him.
In the Katha Upanishad the chariot is likened to the body, and the horses
pulling the chariot to the senses. As the metaphor is applied here, Arjuna
represents the mind, and the driver represents the higher buddhi. The prime
nature of the mind is to consider: shall I do it or not? When the mind learns to
seek the advice of buddhi, the student ceases to be fickle minded, learning
instead to make proper determinations and decisions in all circumstances.
In this verse Sri Krishna is referred to as Achyuta, and the name
Gudakesha is used for Arjuna. Achyuta means one who is not fickle, and
Gudakesha means the conqueror of sleep. These words denote that the
teacher should be firm and consistent and the student should never allow
himself to be subject to sloth, inertia, or laziness. Arjuna is an embodiment of
a good sadhaka, and Sri Krishna a competent teacher. For lack of
decisiveness one becomes fickle, and for lack of awareness one is caught by
inertia and sloth. These are serious obstacles that do not allow the student to
progress.

26. There the son of Pritha saw those who were like fathers and
grandfathers to him, teachers, uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, as well as
companions,
27. Fathers-in-law, as well as friends in both armies; seeing all those
kinsmen standing there, Arjuna the son of Kunti,
28. Possessed by a pitiful mood, feeling very sad, said these words: I see
these kinsmen present here with the intent to fight.
When Arjuna inspects the opposing army, he sees that among its leaders
are his teachers, cousins, fathers-in-law, and other close relatives and friends.
He suddenly becomes affected by his attachment to his relatives, sinks into a
self-created pool of sorrow, and forgets his purpose. Attachment is the
greatest source of misery. The strands of attachment bind the sadhaka and
weaken his determination, will, and inner strength. He forgets the ultimate
goal of life and becomes a victim of mundane and transitory relationships.
In such situations, aspirants may begin to argue with their teachers. Such
an exchange can be helpful on the path of sadhana, for it becomes a process
of learning if it occurs between a sincere student and a wise preceptor. The
dialogue helps one to confront and analyze his weaknesses. Sri Krishna, a
perfect yogi, is aware of Arjuna’s inner turmoil and allows him to express
himself.
When one experiences the grief and sorrow that arise from attachment,
he does not remain wise, and the unwise cannot discriminate right from
wrong. Because of his involvement and attachment, Arjuna becomes
confused and loses his objectivity. Thus he cannot reach impartial
conclusions and act justly. One who is enveloped in attachment is incapable
of knowing or deciding things correctly. One who is attached to the mundane
life argues irrationally and is unable to understand the consequences of his

actions.

29. My limbs are frozen, my mouth is drying up, my body trembles and
hairs stand on end.
30. Gandiva, the great bow, is slipping from my hand, and my skin is
burning. Nor can I stand up; my mind is, as it were, whirling;
Even the finest among men can sink into the depths of sorrow. There are
many examples of great seekers on the path of light who experienced
moments of grief and sorrow during which they lost touch with the higher
reality and became overwhelmed by the strong power of mundane
attachment. For instance, the sage Vashishtha became despondent when he
lost his son, even though birth and death had already revealed their secrets to
him. The nervous system cannot handle such a flood of negative energy.
Thus the body starts trembling, shaking, and jerking, and one loses all control
of the body. It is sorrow, anger, and fear that create such symptoms.
Sorrow, infatuation, and other emotions weaken the body and sap the
physical strength of even a healthy man. A black bee has tremendous power,
enabling it to bore a hole through wood, but when the bee becomes infatuated
with the fragrance of the lotus blossom, it is unable to escape from the
closing lotus petals that hold it captive after the sun sets. The history of
mankind is a testimony to the fact that infatuation for alcohol, an imbalanced
attitude toward sexuality, and other addictions weaken human strength. The
sorrow that comes as a result of being addicted to objects of the world has
power to change the tissues of the body and can turn a trim and taut figure
into a flabby one.
The endocrine glands react instantly to stressful situations, and so during
a state of anxiety and depression, certain symptoms are noticed. For example,
dryness of the mouth occurs because the salivary glands do not secrete
sufficiently. If one receives shocking, sorrowful news about someone he
loves, that shock may make him cry, and the body may begin to shake and
tremble. Evenness of breath and the motion of the lungs, which play a vital

role in the regulation of the body, are disturbed. Then the heartbeat becomes
irregular, and the blood supply to the brain is inadequate. These are some of
the ways that infatuations and emotions interfere with the body’s normal
responses and have the power to create an imbalance in the body. Because of
such emotional imbalances the body starts building up toxins, and the pores
lose their capacity to expel the toxic buildup. That disturbs the equilibrium in
two systems of the human body: the system that purifies and cleanses the
body (the pores, lungs, kidneys, and bowels) and the system that nourishes
the body (the liver, spleen, heart, brain, and so on).
Arjuna is agitated and despondent; he is caught up in his attachments
and in the emotions that ensue when attachments are threatened. He has lost
his mental and emotional equilibrium, and he has lost touch with the source
of strength within. That kind of regression is a very serious stumbling block
on the forward journey. Human weaknesses are dangerous and destroy
human endeavor if they are not put aside and if they are not dealt with using
inner strength and pure reason.
If one is addicted to drugs such as heroin and the drugs are suddenly
withdrawn, he experiences severe debilitating symptoms. In a similar way
when one is strongly attached to an object in the external world and loses or
anticipates the loss of that object, he suffers physical symptoms such as those
experienced by Arjuna. From the yogic perspective attachment and addiction
are equivalent terms: both lead to emotional and physical suffering.
Many mental and physical disorders are the result of attachment to the
objects of the world. If the object to which one is attached is threatened, one
becomes afraid, and because of the fear of losing the object, he loses mental
balance. An imbalanced mind is a source of much misery, and attachment is
the cause of all misery. Modern psychologists and physicians are becoming
aware that psychological disorders are the main source of many physical
diseases and imbalances. Self-created misery is the source from which
psychosomatic diseases spring. But that which originates in the mind and is
expressed through the body is difficult to cure with medicine. Many of the
ills of human life cannot be alleviated by drugs and other physical means.
Modern psychologists need to develop better methods for treating
psychosomatic disorders, for analysis remains ineffective and psychological
imbalances continue to disturb the physical condition of many clients. Mind
and body are in the habit of reacting to one another. Physical pains are
recorded, stored, and memorized by the mind. Therefore the mind is bound to

be affected by physical pain. Physical diseases disturb the nervous system
and mental life, but the problems that originate in the mind and then reflect
on the body are even more serious. When the mind—the center of sensitivity,
feeling, thoughts, and desires—is disturbed, the body is tormented and
experiences innumerable sorts of pain.
The medicines prescribed to treat mental disorders and diseases caused
by mental disturbance do not resolve the underlying disturbance; they merely
dull the sensitivity of the nervous system. The pain remains, but for some
time one does not experience it. Such medicines are not cures but only
temporary means for soothing the sufferer. The body and mind should be
thoroughly understood as one unit. Only then will effective means of
treatment be developed. One can attain a profound comprehension of
mind/body interaction by studying the nature of each from different angles.
To understand the body, one should study the body’s needs and capacities
while eating, sleeping, working, and during times of physical attraction
toward others. The inseparable link of these two realities, physical and
mental, is pranic energy, called the breath of life.

31. And I see inauspicious omens, O Krishna; nor do I see any good
accruing upon killing my own kinsmen in the battle.
32. I do not desire victory, O Krishna, nor kingdom, nor comforts. What
use do we have for kingdom, Lord of the Senses, and what to us is
enjoyment of pleasures or even life itself?
33. They for whose sake we might desire a kingdom, pleasures, and
comforts are standing here before us on the battlefield, having abandoned
their very lives and wealth.
34. Teachers, father-like elders, sons as well as grandfathers, uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives—
35. I do not wish to kill them even if they are killing me, O Destroyer of
Illusion, not even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds. How
then could I do so merely for the sake of this earth?
36. What pleasure can we derive by killing the sons of Dhritarashtra, O
Faultless One? Only sin can accrue to us by killing these felons.
37. Therefore, it does not behoove us to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra,
our kinsmen. How can we be happy after killing our very own relatives, O
Krishna?
38. Though the Kauravas’ minds are impaired by greed and so are not
seeing, the fault accrues by the destruction of the family and the sin in the
desire to injure friends.
39. How then should we not know enough to turn away from this sin, as
we are able to see the fault that accrues upon the destruction of the family,
O Krishna?
It is said that the devil uses scripture for his own convenience. Likewise
Duryodhana, the wicked son of an unjust father, applied all possible means to
justify his stand. He even exploited religious sentiments so that the kingdom

would not have to be returned to the Pandavas. Many political leaders do not
hesitate to quote scriptures and in other ways exploit religion in order to
attain selfish ends. Many irreligious leaders thus exploit the innocent in the
name of God and religion.
Dhritarashtra, the blind father of Duryodhana, asked Sanjaya to persuade
the Pandavas not to take up arms. Sanjaya gave a long sermon, saying “O
Dharma (Yudhishthira, the eldest brother of the Pandavas), you are the best
of men and would never violate the moral law of society. You have the
capacity to forgive the sins of the Kauravas. It certainly does not behoove
you to be cruel, to fight a fierce war, and to kill your cousins and teachers.”
Sanjaya advised the Pandavas to become renunciates and suggested that
begging would be superior to fighting the war. He gave that religious sermon
on renunciation just before the war was about to be fought, and Arjuna’s
dejection and despondency were brought about by it.
Suggestion creates a hypnotic effect, and hypnosis diminishes the
faculty of discrimination. People in general are very much influenced by the
suggestions of others, and suggestion is, in fact, the very basis of modern
education. It is the wrong method of education, for one loses the ability to
inquire and just follows what he has been told without logic and reasoning. If
we learn how to free ourselves from the impressions received by suggestive
education, we can then independently learn that which is useful, healthy, and
valid. There are higher and superior methods of learning and exploring, and
there are many dimensions of knowledge that are as yet unexplored by the
vast majority of people.
Brahma Vidya (the knowledge of absolute Truth) is the highest
knowledge, and direct experience is the best means of gaining that
knowledge. Direct experience is by far the finest means to attain knowledge
in any dimension of life. One should learn through direct experience, for that
alone is valid. All other methods are incomplete and therefore misleading. An
aspirant should carefully choose a path for himself by examining his
capacities, abilities, and strengths. He should avoid suggestive ideas and thus
not become distracted and dissipated. Reading books that dissipate and
distract one’s mind should be avoided. Conversing with those who are not on
the path and living in the company of those who do not practice sadhana also
lead to dissipation. One must encourage the faculty of discrimination within
in order to counter such negative influences. Seeking advice from a
competent teacher is helpful, for a wise teacher is experienced in receiving

knowledge directly, and such unalloyed knowledge is free from the fanciful
suggestions and influences of ordinary people.
Arjuna is deluded by his attachment and loses sight of his duty and the
aim of life. He begins to identify with Duryodhana and imagines that by
fighting this righteous war, he will be behaving exactly like Duryodhana.
External influences can lead one to think in such an illogical way and thus
have a disturbing effect that can change the whole course of one’s life. “Not
delusion but constant awareness” would be a suitable thought for Arjuna.
That would soothe his heart and bring him to the right path.
All of Arjuna’s arguments are irrational because they are the
outpourings of the influences of the strongest of all enemies: attachment.
When one is attached, he isolates himself from the whole and thus deprives
himself from listening to the voice of his conscience and to his preceptors.
The faculty of discrimination does not then function, and one rationalizes to
justify his emotional state. He will then never reach his goal, for he has lost
all sense of direction.
In modern life we see most people selling their ideas, trying to prove
that they are right. To support their notions, they quote the scriptures or seek
other justification. Such a person gives many suggestions to his own mind,
for before one can seduce others, he must first seduce himself. Modern man
is blind; he does not understand the purpose of life. He sees only the
imaginary world that self-suggestion and the suggestions of others have
created. He desires quick results and wants to do things in his own way
without consideration for others.
There are four types of people: those who are time oriented, those who
are goal oriented, those who are life oriented, and those who are purpose
oriented. In today’s world we find mostly time oriented people. They are
selfish, narrow, and conceited. Time oriented people do things to fulfill their
selfish ends without purpose or goal and are not aware of the consequences of
their actions. Time is fleeting for them. They have no sense of tomorrow, so
they demand immediate gratification. They react impulsively to external
stimuli to fulfill their desires for sensory gratification. They take advantage of
others; they cannot think beyond their own concerns. Slightly higher are
those whose lives are directed toward certain goals. Those goals, however,
are related to the pleasures of the mundane and temporal world. But at least
those people have goals and do not act impulsively like time oriented people.
Higher still is the life of those who try to remain in peace and to live in

harmony. They believe in co-existence as a way of life, so they do not like to
disturb the equilibrium of others nor do they desire to possess unlawfully the
wealth and property of others. But the highest path is followed by those who
are purpose oriented and who direct all their energies and use all their
resources to fulfill their single purpose: Self-realization. Duryodhana is time
oriented and is not at all conscious of the purposefully oriented life. Arjuna,
by contrast, is expected to be an embodiment of a purposefully oriented life,
but he slips from the highest to the lowest level because of the influences of
attachment.
The physical and psychological symptoms that are experienced by
Arjuna make it clear that his objection to fighting is not based on nonattachment and renunciation but on intense emotional reactions due to his
attachment. A student sometimes talks as though he has the wisdom of a
great master, whereas his behavior shows that he is under serious strain and
stress and that his mind is imbalanced. Such “wisdom” is not part of any
knowledge but is described by Patanjali as false knowledge. Many people are
capable of delivering a sermon full of wondrous statements of wisdom, but
one has to examine through which channel that wisdom is coming. Wisdom
of speech is not the same as true wisdom. When the body is in a state of
equilibrium, real wisdom finds its way. Mind and body are the instruments
that create melodies that help one to be tranquil and enable him to sing the
eternal song of life. But when there is disharmony and the mind and body are
not tuned in a coordinated way, they create a cacophony that is unpleasant to
the human ear and distracting to the mind. Listening to the “words of
wisdom” from the mouth of Arjuna, Sri Krishna knows that this “wisdom” is
mere escapism and not the wisdom that inspires one to tread the path of life
and light.

40. Upon the disappearance of family traditions and rules of conduct,
vice and unrighteousness subdue the entire family.
41. When subdued by vice, O Krishna, the women of the family become
corrupted; when the women are corrupted, O Ruler of your clan, there
occurs confusion of the social structure.
42. Such confusion leads only to hell for the whole family, including
those who have destroyed the family. Even the ancestors fall into hell, since
the rites and observances for preventing them from doing so are no longer
performed.
43. Because of these faults of the destroyers of the family, which cause
the confusion of the social structure, the perennial national traditions as
well as the family traditions are uprooted.
44. When the family traditions of human beings are thus uprooted, O
Krishna, these human beings have to dwell in hell indefinitely—so have we
heard in the tradition.
45. Oh, alas, we are embarking upon committing a great sin as we are
preparing to kill our own kinsmen out of greed for kingdom and comfort.
Woman is the builder of society. The institution of family life is her
original idea; she is its architect, and she has remained the custodian of the
cultural heritage. Even today in Hindu, Jewish, Irish, and several other
cultures, the woman is the center and organizer of the family. It is she who

plans the disciplinary program for the children. A society that does not give
due place to women goes toward degeneration and disintegration, and if a
society starts acting in an irresponsible manner, it is because the family
institution has become disturbed.
Arjuna, a brilliant thinker and warrior, plunges into grief when he
foresees that the heroes killed in the war will leave innumerable widows.
When the population becomes imbalanced, having more females than males,
it is difficult to maintain loyalty toward one mate. And if the mind gets
involved outside of the marriage, it becomes distracted. The whole course of
the individual’s life is then altered. Arjuna has the insight to bring that
problem to his consciousness. Of all Arjuna’s arguments, this one makes the
most sense.
Perfect understanding between marriage partners is important, and
fidelity plays a significant part in that. If fidelity is lost, the values on which
the society is erected crumble, and the progeny are weakened. Purity in a
marital relationship is a significant factor in sharing a harmonious life
together and in giving birth to and raising healthy children. In today’s society
fidelity may seem to be a foolish idea. Some Westerners think that fidelity is
merely an Eastern more, but that is simply a justification to support
irresponsibility.
Arjuna’s prediction clearly reflects what is taking place in modern
society. There does not seem to be harmony between individuals either
within the family or in society. The construction of society is the profound
responsibility of its individual members. That responsibility can be fulfilled
only when the members of society practice discipline and self-control. For
lack of these arise many mental, emotional, and physiological disorders that
consume considerable time and energy. To cure these problems is one of the
reasons modern therapy came into existence, but Eastern teachers and
therapists believe that prevention is better than cure.
One must understand the difference between human civilization and
animal life. If a human being runs around irresponsibly like an animal, it
shows that discipline and self-control have not been cultivated in his life.
Without practicing discipline, one cannot gather his scattered energy, and all
his goals will remain dreams that never materialize. Discipline is not a
punishment but a part of growth, without which mental and physical health
cannot be maintained.

46. If the sons of Dhritarashtra, with weapons in hand, kill me in the
battle while I am unarmed and unavenging, that will be more beneficial to
me.

Sanjaya said
47. Having spoken thus, in the middle of the battle Arjuna sat down on
the seat of the chariot, putting away the bow together with the arrows, his
mind agitated with grief.
The teachings of the Bhagavad Gita are imparted by Sri Krishna in
response to the confusion and despondency of Arjuna. As we have seen, there
are many factors that cause Arjuna’s despair: (1) He is about to become
involved in a heinous war that could destroy the best of men from both
camps; (2) The war is between two groups of the same family; (3) Arjuna is
fighting against his teachers and elders; (4) He is fighting a fierce battle to
regain his and his brothers’ rights in the mundane world; and (5) Arjuna is
afraid of the destruction of the prevailing order of society and its noble
traditions. At the crucial moment when the battle is beginning, these thoughts
create a serious dilemma in Arjuna’s mind. He is so confused that he cannot
discriminate and judge what is right and wrong, what is lawful and unlawful.
Arjuna’s mind is so affected that he completely forgets who he is and
what his duties are. Confused and dejected, he sinks into grief and casts his
bow and arrow aside. Thus the first chapter has been called Vishada yoga, the
yoga of dejection or sorrow. The word yoga comes from the Sanskrit root yuj,
meaning to unite or to join. Here the word yoga has been used in a negative
way because Arjuna joins with grief and sorrow rather than with the divine.
Patanjali, the codifier of yoga science, describes two kinds of knowledge:
right knowledge and wrong knowledge. Right knowledge leads one to
positive thinking and experience, whereas wrong knowledge leads one to
negativity. Sanjaya’s sermon created a negative train of thought in Arjuna’s

mind. A teacher, counselor, or therapist who is not sincere can misguide and
mislead his students.
It is important to carefully study the literature, follow the teachings, and
practice the methods of a system for self-transformation. If the methods of
sadhana are not well organized, systematized, and methodical, one’s mental
state can become disturbed. One can then sink into the pool of sorrow instead
of reaching the garden of perennial joy. Fortunate are those who are
determined to follow the path of Self-realization with sincerity,
determination, and a one-pointed mind under the guidance of a preceptor who
is selfless, loving, and has already attained Self-realization.
The science of yoga is a scientific and practical exploration of the inner
life. It is extremely helpful in self-analysis, self-control, and selftransformation. How can one say that it is not suitable and applicable to
modern man? Many are prejudiced against the use of yoga psychology
because they have only a superficial knowledge of mental life. Their
understanding of the human being is fragmented; they have no insight into
higher dimensions of consciousness. It is amazing to note that many
contemporary Eastern psychologists have been following in the footsteps of
other modern psychologists. That is like forgetting reality and chasing a
mirage. Although the system developed by yoga science is thorough and
complete, many modern scientists are repelled by the word yoga for no good
reason. Mere analytical methods and the study of dreams do not help patients
much, for they are not taught how to prevent themselves from becoming
victims of external stimuli and internal disorganization. If not properly and
systematically guided, an aspirant’s mental train is either derailed or runs in a
direction contrary to its destination. Arjuna was fortunate to have Yogeshvara
Krishna as a guide and counselor to bring him out of that situation.
Here ends the first chapter in which the despondency of Arjuna is
described.

Chapter Two
The Way of Self Knowledge

Sanjaya said
1. To him who was thus possessed with a pitiful mood, whose eyes were
distressed and filled with tears, and who was suffering from sadness, the
destroyer of Madhu, Sri Krishna, addressed these words.
Although Arjuna formerly felt confident of his strength and knew he
was capable of destroying his enemy, he lost that awareness when he became
overwhelmed with pity. But such pity is merely an outburst of weakness.
When one pities others, he identifies himself with those whom he pities, and
he is then distracted by the objects of his identification. He identifies with
weakness and forgets his true Self. Pity helps neither the one who pities nor
the one who is pitied. Arjuna’s pity for those on the battlefield led him to pity
himself as well.
After making sincere efforts, Arjuna thought there was an
insurmountable barrier in front of him, and he lost his mental balance. Kanva
Rishi, a sage of the Vedic period, also experienced moments of spiritual
turmoil. He had practiced severe austerities and mortifications for many years
and had faithfully followed the righteous path of sadhana but was not able to
attain his goal. Finally Kanva burst into tears and surrendered all human
endeavor, thus opening himself to receive the strength that lies beyond the
known field of consciousness. When human resources are exhausted,
something from beyond comes to one’s aid. Sincere efforts and a one-pointed

mind with a single desire to know are the keys to attain that experience.

The Blessed Lord said
2. From where has this ignominy favored of the ignoble, un-heavenly,
and disreputable, entered you at such a troublesome time, O Arjuna?
3. Do not lapse into impotency, O Son of Pritha; it does not well behoove
you. Abandon this littleness and weakness of the heart and rise, O Scorcher
of Enemies.
On one’s journey to self-awakening, he encounters many stumbling
blocks and cries for help from the divine or a wise teacher and counselor like
Sri Krishna. Arjuna suffers from self-pity and dejection and thus ignores his
inner strength, but Sri Krishna makes Arjuna aware of that strength.
A child first learns from his parents and then from his teachers in school,
but that education is far from complete. All that he has learned does not bring
fulfillment. There is still the role to be played by the spiritual teacher, who is
one’s greatest friend. Such a friend helps one to overcome the trials and
tribulations of life. One purpose of the spiritual teacher is to protect his
student with his mighty, tender, and loving arms whenever he is in danger or
faces a dilemma.
Responding to Arjuna’s state, Sri Krishna, a true friend and great
teacher, speaks to him and makes him aware of the need to fulfill his duty. Sri
Krishna explains to Arjuna that he has completely forgotten himself and has
become a victim of false identification. He says, “A warrior like you should
not behave in a cowardly manner. Remember your noble Aryan heritage and
perform your duty.” The word Arya is a Sanskrit word that means “fully
civilized.” The Aryans established a most ancient culture that was sustained
by a community of individuals who were learned, intellectual, full of
wisdom, and who understood life both within and without. The language of

the Aryans was Sanskrit, and their vast literature is profound and beautiful.
Sri Krishna reminds Arjuna of the glorious past of his ancestors and makes
him realize that he is a kshatriya (warrior), and not a coward.
Arjuna is in danger, and it is therefore necessary that he immediately
assimilate all his scattered energy and overcome his feelings of pity and
despondency. All too often the call of one’s attachments dissipates the mind,
and one forgets the source of power and light that is hidden within. Sri
Krishna makes Arjuna aware of the courage that is within him and
encourages him to act on the basis of that courage. In the moments of
weakness in life, the great ones always restore the courage of their beloved
students with their graceful advice.
Three distinct ways of understanding and approaching life are
allegorically described in the Bhagavad Gita. First, the Kauravas are
dependent on external resources and the physical strength of their army. They
represent the materially-oriented perspective, as they are concerned with the
external world and are not sensitive to the inner life. Second, Arjuna, a
skillful warrior and a true seeker, loses his sense of direction when he forgets
the deeper reality and identifies himself with the weak. Because of pity,
Arjuna is crippled and unable to use his skills and inner strength. Arjuna is
more sensitive and compassionate than the ignorant person who identifies
with material existence, but his sensitivity cripples him and makes him
ineffective. Third, at the most dangerous period of Arjuna’s life, Sri Krishna
awakens him to still another level of consciousness, leading him to realize
that which will dispel the darkness of his ignorance. In that mode of
consciousness one is aware that the immortal Atman is the center of his
being. After attaining that awareness, one becomes self-confident and
fearless. Understanding these three levels of consciousness makes one aware
that compared to inner strength, external strength is of little value. If inner
strength is lost or forgotten, one becomes weak, no matter how much external
might he possesses.

Arjuna said

4. O Lord Krishna, how can I fight back with arrows against Bhishma
and Drona in the battle; they are both worthy of my honor and respect, O
Destroyer of Enemies.
The dialogues between the enlightened ones and their students are
revered and recognized as great sources of knowledge. The Upanishads are
full of dialogues between the enlightened ones and true seekers. In those
dialogues the seeker places all his doubts before his spiritual teacher with
profound confidence in him, and the teacher dispels those doubts with his
enlightened explanations. Here Arjuna becomes perplexed when he sees face
to face his elders and his teachers ready to fight him. He does not understand
why those great people should be killed, even though he knows they have lost
touch with the higher dimensions of reality and are knowingly supporting an
unjust cause simply to prove their loyalty. Upon what should Arjuna act:
truth, justice, and dharma; one’s so-called self-imposed duty; or attachment,
pity, and cowardice? This confusion will be eliminated by the teachings of
Sri Krishna.

5. It is indeed better in this world to live by begging than to kill the gurus
of great stature. By killing my gurus, I would be attaining only worldly,
blood-smeared pleasures and gains, and ignoring righteousness and
liberation.
In this verse Arjuna uses the word guru to refer to Bhishma and Drona.
Killing a guru or a teacher is the most heinous crime one can imagine. But is
he a guru who supports the unjust? In this dialogue it is Sri Krishna alone
who is a true guru. Throughout life we learn from many teachers, but there is
only one guru. The guru is he who is totally selfless and completely free from
greed and the expectation of receiving something from the student. The true
guru gives the best he has and never accepts anything from his students. Is

there anything that a real guru will not do or has not done selflessly for his
students? Selflessness alone is the singular expression of love. Guru is a
sacred word that has been misused many times in the past and is completely
vulgarized today. To declare that “I am a guru” is a false pronouncement; the
modern “guru” is a spiritual joke.
The authentic guru-disciple relationship is the highest of all. The
relationship between teacher and student also is worthy of reverence, but in
no way can a teacher be called a guru. The actual word that should be used
for a guru is gurudeva, which means “that bright being who dispels the
darkness of ignorance.” The gurudeva represents a noble tradition through
which flows pure love inseparably mingled with unalloyed knowledge. The
Bhagavad Gita is a dialogue in which that profound knowledge is imparted
by Sri Krishna, the gurudeva, to his disciple, Arjuna.
Arjuna experiences conflict about whether he should fight the war or
follow the path of renunciation. He thinks of abandoning his duty, retiring to
a forest dwelling, and living by begging alms. That is a most dangerous
tangent for Arjuna, who should prefer to not live than to live in such a
condition. Arjuna’s thought does not arise out of non-attachment, which is a
primary and essential requisite on the path of renunciation. Therefore he has
no right to justify his refusal to fight by using the argument that it would be
more appropriate for him to become a renunciate and beg alms. The sort of
reasoning that Arjuna offers is not only dangerous to himself but injurious to
those innocent students who are just beginning to tread the path and might
follow his example. Had Arjuna retired and adopted the life of a renunciate,
the noble tradition of renunciation would have been reduced to
meaninglessness.
In everyone’s life there come such moments when he loses the faculty of
discrimination and decisiveness. He wants to escape instead of resolving the
conflict. We often see people use spirituality and meditation as means to
escape, and many people renounce the world in such a state of uncertainty.
But true renunciation is entirely different. It is the highest of all paths trodden
by the best of men who have already analyzed the values of life with its
currents and cross currents. It is not a path of escapism. Performing one’s
own actions skillfully is necessary as long as one lives in the world.

6. Nor do we know which one of us is the more powerful, whether we
would win or whether they would win over us. Those, whom upon killing
we would have no desire to continue living, the very sons of Dhritarashtra,
are standing before us in prominence.
Arjuna’s arguments clearly show his intense uncertainty about whether
he should fight or retire. He is obsessed by both the fear of being victorious
and the fear of being defeated. Such uncertainty comes when one has lost the
sense of discrimination, and such an indecisive person is unable to fight the
battle of life.

7. My true nature subdued by the fault of miserableness, my mind
deluded as to the righteous conduct, I ask you: whatever is definitely better,
do tell me that. I am your disciple surrendering to you. Do teach me and
guide me.
8. I do not see anything that might remove this grief that is drying up my
senses—not even a prosperous kingdom without enemies, nor sovereignty
over the gods.
Arjuna admits that his mind is not functioning well; he is full of doubts
and is indecisive. One’s acknowledgment of his confusion is a step forward,

for it shows that he is ready to learn. The student, with full conviction and
trust, then places the entire book of his life before his teacher for scrutiny.
That is always expected of a good student. If one accepts that he is ignorant,
he can be led by a competent teacher because such an aspirant is open to
receiving higher knowledge. At that point one has jigyasa, which means a
strong desire to learn and practice Brahma Vidya. It is an extraordinary
moment when one accepts a great teacher as his own, requests the teacher to
accept him as a student, and in turn is accepted as a student by the teacher.
Sri Krishna, who has always been Arjuna’s friend, now becomes his teacher
as well. That is a unique relationship.
We learn two lessons from Arjuna’s predicament. First, no leader,
sadhaka, or hero should take it for granted that he will not slip back to the
sorrowful, bewildered state of despondency. Second, in everyone’s life there
comes a time when he experiences difficulty in deciding that which is right.
Great men are great because they do not lose their equanimity in a difficult
situation no matter how catastrophic it seems to be. And if there is a
temporary state of disturbance or uncertainty, they are able to recover from
such a lapse.
One should realize that he can even recover from a serious mental
disturbance such as that experienced by Arjuna. Self-confidence can be
regained by becoming aware of the deeper dimensions of life. If the system
of sadhana is well organized, the sadhaka may stumble, but he will once
again tread the path. One finds obstacles in every phase of life, and at times it
may seem that one cannot gather his strength. That is only natural in human
life. But those like Arjuna who are guided by a great teacher emerge safely
from the misery created by the lack of proper perspective.
In his sorrow Arjuna loses his equilibrium and cries plaintively for help.
Sri Krishna, possessing perfect knowledge and mastery of all levels and
forces of life, brings Arjuna back to the state of equanimity, encouraging
Arjuna not to weaken himself, not to be scattered or dissipated.

Sanjaya said

9. Arjuna the Master of Sleep, a scorcher of enemies, having uttered this
to Krishna, Lord of the Senses, again addressed Govinda (Krishna), saying,
I shall not fight,’ and then lapsed into silence.
Arjuna asserts that he will not fight, showing that he is not fully
prepared to listen to the words of Sri Krishna even though he outwardly
professes surrender. Underneath, in the subtle realms, lie lurking seeds of
lust, greed, and attachment, the latter being the most powerful. For this
reason, the aspirant is unable to follow the advice of his preceptor and enters
into arguments with him. Even after a student acknowledges his teacher’s
spiritual attainment and decides to surrender to him, the surrender is not
complete because the student still lacks direct experience. Self-confidence
and complete surrender are impossible without direct experience.
Arjuna wants to find a solution to his problem, so he accepts Sri Krishna
as his preceptor, although he still has some resistance. In modern
psychotherapy, the client also resists. Resistance is a habit that continues to
play an important part in the client’s life even though he may understand that
such a habit is injurious. Resistance occurs because of helplessness and lack
of knowledge, so both practice and knowledge are essential.
A disciple is still ignorant even after surrender before the master, for
surrender before the teacher is not enlightenment. It is only the primary step.
This is essential, but it is far from being complete. At this point Arjuna has
not yet received the instructions that will completely free him from his selfcreated bonds of misery. The darkness is not dispelled by surrendering. Light
alone tears the veil of the mist, and that light flows from the eternal stream of
knowledge. Accepting a teacher is taking a step toward the light.
A teacher is like a boat that is the essential means to help one cross the
mire of delusion. The teacher shares his experiences, making the student
aware of the obstacles and stumbling blocks on his journey. A seeker should
not delude himself and believe that by accepting someone as a guru or
becoming a disciple, he does not have to practice, that he will become
enlightened without any effort. Spiritual leaders such as Sri Krishna, Jesus,
Moses, and Buddha did not possess the power to enlighten the students who
accepted them as their guides but who did not listen, follow, and practice
their teachings.
After asserting that he will not fight, Arjuna lapses into silence because
of his grief and sorrow. Silence makes the mind one-pointed. So if one is in

grief, the grief becomes more intense in silence; if one is in love, silence
intensifies the feeling of love; if one is on the path of Self-realization, silence
offers no distraction but joy beyond estimation.
Defeatism leads one to retreat to a passive way of being. That is not
what is expected of a warrior or aspirant, who should instead set an example
for others to follow. Arjuna’s refusal to fight is an escape and not a virtue. It
is not renunciation, for a renunciate has to burn all mundane desires in the
fire of knowledge. Arjuna talks of renunciation without understanding it. In
weak moments one may seek an escape and think of renouncing instead of
dealing with the issues that are of vital interest to the individual and to
society as a whole. One who follows the path of renunciation in such a
situation is a coward and an escapist.
Pacifism as it is expressed by Arjuna is an entirely different way of
responding to a situation than the philosophy of ahimsa (noninjury). In
pacifism one has no control over the situation, whereas in ahimsa one
expresses the philosophy of love by way of negation: non-injury, non-killing,
non-harming, and non-hurting. If one applies the code of ahimsa, an
important part of yogic teachings, he will be able to truly love. When one
learns how to love with mind, action, and speech, he then starts practicing
truth. Love comes first; truth comes afterward. But love and truth are actually
synonymous: one is an expression of the truth and the other is truth itself.
They are inseparable, like two sides of the same coin.
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the Indian nation, practiced the teachings
of the Bhagavad Gita for more than forty years. He was like a great warrior
who set an unparalleled example in the world. Gandhi understood that ahimsa
is the law of life and therefore advocated non-violence. But Gandhi was not a
pacifist. He actively and assertively led his nation to independence. When
one is a failure and is not capable of attaining something, he withdraws. Such
pacifism is a product of defeatism and not at all a creative quality. There
comes a time in every student’s life when he cannot handle a situation, and
then he becomes a non-participant. That type of pacifism leads one to inertia
and sloth, the greatest of all enemies for the aspirant.
Of course pacifism can arise from an entirely different motivation. To
fight a war that is unrighteous, that is not for a just cause, is definitely a
heinous crime. Withdrawing from participation in such wars is also a
motivation for pacifism. Those who do not wish to fight, kill, or destroy
others unjustly have a right to withdraw themselves. That kind of pacifism is

healthy.
In the case of Arjuna, war is inevitable, and it is for a just cause. Arjuna
is a kshatriya (warrior); his primary duty is to fight. If a renunciate were to
join the army and participate in battle, he would not be following his path of
dharma (duty). And if a warrior in the midst of a battle were to become a
renunciate, it would create great chaos. There would be a serious problem in
one’s life if the hands and feet were to abandon their respective duties and
assume each other’s duties. Life would be impossible if the ear tried to see
and the eyes to taste. It is important to know one’s dharma, to know the right
action and the right time. The dharma of Arjuna is to fight and not to retire.
Arjuna’s thought of renunciation is mere escapism: the thought does not
appear until he is on the battlefield. This clearly shows that Arjuna has been
unwisely influenced by the counsel of Sanjaya and is unwilling to perform
his duties.

10. To him who was sad, O Descendant of Bharata, there between the
two armies, the Lord of the Senses said these words smiling at him:
After Sri Krishna listens attentively to Arjuna, a dignified smile appears
on his face. Sri Krishna’s smile is like the smile of a father who, even though
he sees his child tormented by grief and sorrow, feels confident because he
understands that this is only a temporary phase. He knows that after receiving
helpful advice, his child will soon come out of his confused emotional state
and make great strides toward understanding and balanced action. Sri Krishna
does not smile because he pities Arjuna. His smile is a smile of confidence.
For Sri Krishna is fully confident that he can bring Arjuna out of his
desolation and lead him to Self-realization.
Earlier, Arjuna wanted Sri Krishna to participate in the war, forgetting
that he himself is the greatest of all heroes of his time. Sri Krishna, a friend
and preceptor, does not want Arjuna to be dependent on the resources of
others and encourages him to fight his own battles. Here again the teachings
of the Bhagavad Gita are useful to modern man, for modern man tends to be
dependent on leaders, teachers, and preceptors. Final emancipation, however,
necessitates that one learn to light his own lamp. Sri Krishna agrees to freely

advise Arjuna whenever he needs his help, as a selfless teacher lovingly
advises his student. He remains with his disciple in the midst of the
battlefield, showing him the path and explaining the methods for conquering
all the foes that reside in every human mind and heart. A human being is
often weak and prone to negative suggestions that are detrimental to his
unfoldment, but with determination and selfless advice from a preceptor, one
can attain a balanced state of mind.
An important characteristic of both a good teacher and a good
psychotherapist is to have empathy for the student’s or client’s predicament
while not identifying with the student or client. It is the responsibility of a
guide to lead his student and impart the profound knowledge attained by the
guide’s own direct experience. In modern psychology the mechanics of
therapy focus on solving the obvious problem and on the analysis of certain
unconscious conflicts. There is nothing to lead one beyond the conscious and
unconscious mind so that he does not repeatedly fall into the trapping tides of
the unconscious mind and become overwhelmed by his emotions, thoughts,
moods, and reactions. Modern therapists have theoretical knowledge to a
certain extent, but they are still caught up in the unresolved issues emanating
from their own unconscious. They have not gone through an adequate
training program to reach a genuine state of equanimity and tranquility,
though they may pose as though they are peaceful and content. Many
therapists suffer from the same conflicts and problems as their clients. The
Upanishads say, “The blind lead the blind, and there is no hope.” In
attempting to resolve one’s conflicts, it is important to choose the right guide.
The therapy applied by Sri Krishna includes knowledge of the Self, the
organization of internal states, the explanation of various methods of
sadhana, and the way to perform one’s duties skillfully and selflessly. Sri
Krishna does not merely deal with the surface problems or the symptoms
presented by Arjuna but with Arjuna’s whole being from the beginning to its
final destiny.

The Blessed Lord said

11. You are grieving about those over whom one should not grieve, and
yet you are speaking words of pretended wisdom. The wise do not grieve
about those who are yet breathing nor about those who have ceased to
breathe.
Aspirants can be divided into three categories. Students in these three
categories have different qualities, and their strengths are on different levels.
The first kind of aspirant is like an elephant that is very powerful but is
unable to separate sugar from sand. Such an aspirant is unable to distinguish
what is helpful from what is harmful to his growth, what is real from what is
illusory and binding. Another type of student is like the ant that makes great
efforts and is capable of separating sugar from sand but has no capacity to
store what it has gained. Such an aspirant repeatedly slips back to the point
from which he started. The third type of aspirant may be compared to the bee
that is able to collect the sweetness from the flowers and transform it into
honey. Such a student comprehends and assimilates the truths that are offered
and continues to apply them in his daily life. Arjuna fits within the third
category of students. He is open and ready to integrate the teachings of
Brahma Vidya into his own life. Thus Sri Krishna begins to impart that
perennial knowledge to Arjuna, and that knowledge leads him to understand
that his grief and sorrow are based on his sense of false identity and strong
attachment.
Sri Krishna, the teacher of Brahma Vidya, first makes Arjuna aware of
the center of consciousness, Atman. He teaches Arjuna that if he constantly
remains aware of that center, he will not go back to the grooves of his past
habit patterns. Arjuna reasons as though he is a wise man, but in actuality he
is mourning and deep in sorrow. Wise is he who has learned to discriminate
truth from untruth and who is not disturbed by the past or by what he
imagines will occur in the future. Such a man understands that past, present,
and future are merely realities created by the human mind, which is frail and
weak. A wise man has profound knowledge of all dimensions of life and is
free from all conditionings of the mind. He understands the mystery of birth
and death. A wise man is he who has attained the knowledge of Atman.
In this verse two words are important and informative: gatasu and
agatasu. Gatasu means the dead and comes from two roots: gata (gone) and
asu (breath). Agatasu means not dead, literally, “whose breath is not gone”

The living are those who are still breathing, and the dead are those whose two
breaths, inhalation and exhalation, have abandoned the city of life. Death is
just the casting off of one unit of the entire composite that makes up the
human being, that part which is considered to be mortal. Death and birth are
two strong habits of the body; they have nothing to do with annihilation.
Death does not annihilate the essential; it merely brings about a change of the
coverings around it. Assuming a new covering is called birth, and casting off
the old is called death. There is no death for the Atman because: (1) Atman is
eternal; it is never born and never dies; it is a perennial source of knowledge;
(2) Atman is self-existent and does not need the support of anything else, for
Atman alone exists everywhere; and (3) Atman is formless: although it
assumes and casts off forms, it remains unaffected.
The great teachers first make their students aware of two distinct
realities. One is called the absolute Reality, and the other is called the
apparent reality. They are like light and shadow. With the help of that
discriminative knowledge, the student becomes fearless and determines to
remove the barrier created by his limited knowledge.
Sri Krishna’s first advice to Arjuna is to develop clarity of mind and
skill in dealing with the external world while at the same time understanding
that the temporal and mundane world is merely the apparent reality. Without
comprehensive knowledge of both the absolute and apparent realities, the
discriminative faculty is not able to function properly, and strong habit
patterns create a network of entanglement that draws the consciousness to
external awareness.
In the Indian system of psychology, the student is led beyond mental
life. Mind in its totality should be understood, but it is more important to be
aware of the source of knowledge, the center of consciousness, Atman.
Knowledge of Brahma Vidya is essential for learning the psychology of the
East. If one studies only the conscious and unconscious parts of the mind and
analyzes only the waking, dreaming, and sleeping states, he will be unable to
comprehend the perennial psychology of the Bhagavad Gita.
Ancient psychologists thoroughly studied both psychology and
philosophy, which are separate subjects but are essentially connected. The
second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, beginning with this verse and going
through Verse 38, teaches Samkhya philosophy, the most ancient system of
the seven schools of Indian philosophy. The word Samkhya means “that
which explains the whole.” It is an analysis of all levels of life and the

universe and is the very basis of yogic science. Yoga is a practical science
and is supported by Samkhya philosophy. Samkhya philosophy has given
birth to the science of mathematics, the very basis of all sciences. Thus
Samkhya philosophy is the mother of all sciences, and yoga science is its
practical side. They are one and the same, but one offers the formulas and
conclusions, while the other is experiential and experimental.

12. There never was a time, indeed, when I was not, nor you, nor these
rulers of people, nor shall we all from this moment on ever cease to be.
13. As in the body of this bodybearer (A tman) there is childhood, youth,
and old age, so there occurs the transfer to another body. A wise one does
not become confused in this matter.
There is nothing that loses its existence. Existence is never lost,
changed, or subject to destruction. That which changes is the form. After one
becomes aware of the center of consciousness, Atman, he understands that at
the core of his being, he is unchangeable and indestructible. When Sri
Krishna instructs Arjuna not to grieve, he is leading him from the temporal
and mundane to the absolute Reality, which alone is truth.
Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that both he and Arjuna have lived before, and
that there was never a time that they were not. Life is an eternal wave in the
infinite realm of eternity; it is a timeless reality. If one becomes aware of that,
he is free from sorrow. Ordinarily human beings have only knowledge and
awareness of the mortal part of life. They think and talk within the apparent
reality where death and birth are experienced. But when a student becomes
conscious of the non-temporal, unchangeable, and timeless reality, he is no
longer fearful of death and birth, which are only experienced in the world of
names and forms.
The names and forms constantly change: birth and death are two names
for the changes of form that one experiences in this world. But Atman never
changes. It remains one and the same in birth, death, and in all stages of one’s

growth. A wise man is not at all perplexed by the death of the body, for he
knows that Atman never dies.

14. The contacts between the elements, O Son of Kunti, are the causes of
heat, cold, pleasure, and pain. Being non-eternal, these come and go; learn
to withstand them, O Descendant of Bharata.
15. O Bull among Men, the person to whom these do not cause any
suffering, the wise man who is alike to pain and pleasure, he alone is ready
for the immortal state.
Birth and death are two of the innumerable pairs of opposites
experienced in the phenomenal world. All opposites are illusions, and so is
the case with birth and death. All sensory perceptions create pairs of
opposites: pain and pleasure, sorrow and joy, heat and cold. When one of the
senses contacts an object, a sensation is received that is carried by the nerves
to the brain. It is then attended to by the conscious mind and its memory
stored in the unconscious. All sense perceptions are filtered by one’s
conceptualization. So through the senses, the mind receives information in its
own way according to the concepts it has created for itself. Perception and
conception unite in creating the phenomena that are experienced. The mind
functions in the external world with the help of the senses, which are
employed by the mind. Arjuna experiences grief and sorrow because he has
not learned to master the way in which perceptions and conceptions influence
his mind.
Each experience that one has in the phenomenal world has its opposite,
and each experience exists only because its opposite exists. Heat is given
definition by cold, and pain becomes a distinct experience only when
contrasted with its complement, pleasure. If one seeks one of a pair of
opposites, he is sure to be equally influenced by the other, for the phenomena
always go together as a pair. When one is led to a higher realm of reality
from whence he can comprehend how the pairs of opposites arise as a unit, he
learns to develop the philosophy of non-attachment and thus is not affected

by the influence of opposites.
Sri Krishna makes Arjuna aware that that which is experienced through
the senses is transitory and that the cause of his sorrow and grief is his own
deluded, unorganized, and disorderly mind. Teachers in the East always insist
on the practice of discipline in order for the aspirant to learn to withdraw his
senses and thereby to isolate the mind from the effects of perception. It is the
objects of the world and the ways one accepts and conceives of them that
create the feelings of joy and sorrow. Discipline is a gradual but steady way
of self-training that makes the student aware of higher dimensions of life.
Without discipline, the dissipated energy of the mind and the unruly behavior
of the senses cannot be brought under control.
Many modern psychologists do not understand the importance of
discipline. They equate discipline with punishment. Punishment, however,
has the opposite effect of discipline: it produces mental strain that in turn
creates physical tension. Discipline is self-applied, whereas punishment is
imposed on one by others.
Modern students and teachers think that they can accomplish something
of significance without practicing discipline, but that is not true. Modern
students do not want to discipline themselves, and yet they search out that
which is only attainable with discipline. Discipline should not be forced on
the student but should be introduced to him. He should understand that
discipline is the first prerequisite for organizing one’s internal states.
Discipline is a leader that helps one verify, analyze, and know the subtler
dimensions of life.
Telescopes have immense capacities in the external world to show us
countless galaxies. But if one wishes to look inward to study his thoughts,
feelings, and desires, the telescope is of no use. An instrument should be used
for the purpose it was designed to accomplish. Self-discipline is an
instrument for becoming aware of and mastering one’s internal states. The
discipline that helps one gather the dissipated and scattered forces of mind
should be accepted and practiced regularly. Otherwise the human mind
deprives itself of the awareness of the higher dimensions of life.
Arjuna has not yet been introduced by his teacher to the discipline that
would enable him to remain unaffected by the pairs of opposites. Here the
great teacher, Sri Krishna, helps Arjuna understand that the reality created by
sense perception and conception is but momentary and superficial, and that
he should not build his philosophy of life on the values created by that mind

which knows nothing about discipline.

16. That which is nonexistent never comes into being; that which is
existent never goes to non-being. The seers of reality have seen the very end
of both of these.
17. Know that as indestructible by which all this tangible world is
permeated. No one has the power to bring to destruction this unalterable
entity.
We live in two realities at the same time. One is within the field of
ordinary human consciousness; the other is in the unconscious and even
beyond. Only that which is nonexistent, temporal, transitory, and changeable
is conceivable by the mind. But that which is self-existent cannot be grasped
or known by the mind. It will always exist because it is the self-existent,
absolute, and unchangeable reality. That which is existent is called sat, and
that which is nonexistent is called asat—the real and the unreal. The wise
seers are aware of these two realities and say that that which is not selfexistent (here called nonexistent for it is insubstantial) cannot exist in all
times. Therefore, Arjuna is told not to grieve for the nonexistent but to
remain constantly aware of the self-existent reality.
The aspirant should understand that in principle there are two distinct
realities, the eternal and the transitory. He should practice the habit of not
identifying himself with the ever-changing objects of the world. Such
identification deprives one of awareness of his essential nature as Atman,
pure consciousness. The center of consciousness, the source of wisdom,
happiness, and bliss, is indestructible. It is the only existence, and it is
imperishable.
The minds of modern students are not clear about the distinction
between these two realities. Therefore they have no aim. Instead of going in
the right direction, they go in the opposite direction, toward the world of
names and forms. Instead of being happy, they become confused and suffer.
Unless one has a profound knowledge of his destination, treading the path is

a waste of time. But if one prepares himself by practicing discipline and at
the same time has the comprehensive knowledge of the ultimate goal of life,
he can reach his destination by following the positive signs and symptoms.

18. Belonging to the immeasurable, imperishable, eternal owner of the
body, these bodies are said to be perishable; therefore fight, O Descendant
of Bharata.
Sri Krishna teaches Arjuna about the unchangeable nature of Atman and
the temporal and perishable nature of the body and the external world. Atman
has the power to assume any form it likes. All of those forms can be
destroyed, but the eternal, incomprehensible Atman is not subject to any
alteration. It has the power to assume any body, but still it is not the body. It
is without beginning or end (nitya), whereas the body is perishable and
transient (anitya). It is characteristic of the body to undergo a series of
changes between birth and death, and, in actuality, one experiences death
many times in the course of the changes that occur during his lifetime. For a
seed to sprout it has to die in its form as a seed. Then alone can it sprout. All
new forms come about through the death of an old form. Therefore we should
accept death as an essential reality of life, but we do not. We know that things
die, but we do not accept death. There is no cause for sorrow, for Atman is
imperishable.
Arjuna is a most powerful and skilled warrior, and he wants to know the
highest duty, that which needs to be attended to first. “Shall I fight or not?
Shall I continue performing my duties or follow the path of renunciation?”
That is Arjuna’s conflict. Sri Krishna frees Arjuna from the bondage created
by his ignorance, self-pity, despondency, and attachment. He makes Arjuna
aware that it is his duty to fight, not to retreat to the forest dwellings,
escaping from the reality of life. Even in the path of renunciation, one has
moments of confusion about that which has the highest priority. In all
conditions of life, whether one prefers to follow the path of action or
renunciation, he should learn to understand his duties.
After studying this verse, the unwise and the wicked may conclude that
the Bhagavad Gita justifies killing. Such a conclusion shows a lack of

understanding of the depth of the teachings and the way in which they are
applied. The situation of Arjuna is entirely different from that of a person
who is controlled by violent emotions and thus wants to justify his act with
the help of the scriptures. Violence is not at all the subject matter of the
Bhagavad Gita. The Bhagavad Gita does not say “kill anyone you dislike”
but teaches that one should not be afraid to die while performing his duties.
When a doctor uses his surgical knife, he has no intention of killing. He
just wants to remove the abscess that can disturb or destroy his patient’s
whole frame of life. However, when a butcher kills a goat, he has a different
intention: he wants to use the goat for his own selfish ends. When a warrior
fights to establish the good conduct of life and the highest virtues—justice,
truth, and harmony, killing is of an entirely different nature. In that situation
refusing to fight is an escape, a disease brought about by mental imbalance.
And when mental balance is lost, the whole battle of life is lost.

19. He who thinks the embodied One to be a slayer and he who thinks
the embodied One to be slain, neither of them knows correctly. The
embodied One neither kills nor is he killed.
20. He is never born nor does He die, nor having been, does He ever
again cease to be. Unborn, eternal, perennial, this ancient One is not killed
when the body is killed.
21. He who knows this as imperishable, eternal, unborn, unalterable—
how can that person, O Son of Pritha, kill, and whom can he kill or cause
to be killed?
The ignorant think that a human being has the capacity to slay, and that
he himself can be slain. These two erroneous conceptions rob one of his inner

strength. But when one knows the truth, that Atman cannot be slain, he
becomes free from the self-created bondage of his ignorance. For a detailed
description of how that bondage is created, one can study kala (the time
factor) in the twenty-fifth chapter, the Shanti Parva, of the Mahabharata. The
time factor is the prime conditioner of the human mind. It is the task of the
aspirant to release himself from this conditioning and to attain the timeless
state in which there is neither fear nor death nor conditioning. That
experience is possible if one systematically practices the inward methods that
lead him to the Source, instead of going toward the external world and
becoming scattered. There are only three known methods explored by the
sages: prayer, meditation, and contemplation. There is yet another way:
revelation, which is not a method, for it comes through grace. No external
method of knowing can lead one to the fountainhead of awareness, where
infinite knowledge beyond measure resides. After attaining that infinite
knowledge, one understands that the absolute Reality or Truth is never lost,
no matter how many deaths one experiences in his physical and mental life.
In the 20th and 21st verses, which are also essentially found in the Katha
Upanishad, one is taught that the Atman is never born and never dies, though
it apparently seems to be born and to die. That which is eternal always exists,
so it cannot be born. It is ancient, but it appears young, for the body
repeatedly comes into being anew. The ignorant confuse the changes of the
body with the attributeless pure Self, Atman. But despite the changes of the
body, the Eternal remains unchanged.

22. As a man taking off worn out garments later puts on new ones,
similarly the Owner of the body, abandoning worn out bodies, enters other
new ones.
Suppose we put on various colored lenses one by one. We will see the
same thing but in a different light. If we go on changing the angles of our
vision along with the lenses, things will look entirely different each time.
Actually things are not seen as they are; therefore they are not known the way

they are. If the objects of the world are not observed and analyzed
thoroughly, one’s attitude toward objects will be superficial and distorted. So
is the case with human relationships. Human relationships create bondage
because the human mind is in the habit of identifying itself with the external
world, which is conditioned by time and is continually changing. Yet people
ignore that fact and become attached to one another. Misery, bondage, and
fear spring from the ties of attachment, and attachment prevents one from
remaining aware of the realities of human life.
Fear, which is based on the urge for self-preservation, predominates in
our emotional life. Its roots are deeply buried in the unconscious mind, which
governs one’s conscious activities throughout life. The fear of death
constantly remains in the mind of every human being. That fear occurs when
body consciousness predominates. All the fears in human life spring from an
externally-oriented consciousness.
After one fully examines nature and the objects of the world and
analyzes man’s relationship with man and the creatures of the world, he still
finds that his knowledge is incomplete. He is not satisfied and content with
knowing life only in the external world. There is still a desire to know the
whole. One wants to explore the higher dimensions of life and turns his mind
within. There the world seems to be entirely different—full of images,
symbols, ideas, fancies, and fantasies, sometimes in distorted and incomplete
forms. If during that time a proper and exact method is not devised, one’s
increasing awareness of the fleeting nature of the objects of the world leads
him to become more confused. We use many branches of science and many
methods for analyzing the external world. But there are also many fields
within, and there are many methods for exploring the inner world. The
competent and experienced teacher imparts definite approaches and methods
for probing into the subtler aspects of life. No external means whatsoever
help in this journey. It is the journey from the known to the unknown.
Arjuna, like any other human being, becomes confused and full of fears
that arise from his attachment to relationships. He starts trembling in the
midst of a dangerous situation. Sri Krishna makes Arjuna aware of the higher
dimensions of life and their relationship to the external world, starting with
the body. What is the body to us? Are we only a body, or is there something
deeper and more profound for us to comprehend? Examining the body, one
observes that it undergoes many changes. Sri Krishna says that the body is
like a garment, and the human being is the owner of that garment. When one

changes his garment, he continues to exist.
One can easily understand that the center of consciousness, Atman, is
overlayed by many coverings. The aspirant should apply the exact scientific
methods taught by the ancient scriptures and teachers to attain an
understanding of each covering. These methods enable the student to
comprehend both the mere self—body, breath, senses, and all the dimensions
of mind—and to help him go to the source of consciousness. Before one
reaches the fountainhead of life and light from which consciousness flows
spontaneously, he has to understand the various realities that exist. He can
then conceive of the idea that human beings have many subtle bodies within
the physical body.
The dweller within the physical body casts off the worn out external
body and has the choice of assuming a new body. He who knows that the
center of consciousness is eternal and undiminishable realizes that the ideas
of killing and death are merely notions caused by one’s long associaton with
the body and the objects of the world.

23. Weapons do not cleave Him, fire does not burn Him, the waters do
not wet Him, nor does the wind dry Him.
24. He is uncleavable, unburnable, cannot be made wet, nor can He be
made dry; the Eternal, all-permeating, absolute, and unmoving: He is the
ancient One.
25. He is unmanifest, is not the subject of thought, and is said to be
incorruptible; therefore, knowing Him, it does not behoove you to grieve
after anyone.
The eternal center of consciousness is infinite and all-pervasive. It
encompasses all. Therefore nothing has the power to cut It into pieces. Fire

has no power to burn It, and It is impervious to water and wind. The infinite
Atman dwells with all its glory and majesty in the innermost chamber of the
human being. Knowing this truth, the wise never grieve. Sri Krishna leads
Arjuna toward the fountainhead of knowledge of immortality and thereby
helps him attain freedom from all fetters.
Certain verses of the Bhagavad Gita are exactly like those of the
Upanishads. The student should understand that the knowledge of the
Bhagavad Gita is a modified version of the Upanishads and the Vedas. The
great teachers throughout human history have modified that knowledge to
make it more accessible to the students of their time and culture. The flowers
are the same; it is only the vases that change, and the style of arranging the
flowers depends upon the ability of the artist. Knowledge is perennial
because its source is eternal.
The beauty of a good teacher is in the way he imparts wisdom, but the
teacher’s effort is only fifty percent. The other fifty percent is the effort
sincerely made by the sadhaka. Arjuna is receptive, one-pointed, and sincere,
and he is able to comprehend the perennial knowledge Sri Krishna imparts. It
is a true statement that when the student is ready, the master will appear. If
one is truly desirous to know, then he will know. Truth and knowledge are
one and the same, and that tremendous, inconceivable, immeasurable power
comes to the aid of the sadhaka when he has learned to have only one burning
desire: to know the Truth.

26. Now if you believe that this soul is born each time with the birth of a
new body, or that it is eternal, or you believe that it dies upon the death of
the body, even then, O Mighty-armed One, you should not grieve thus.
27. The death of one born is definite, and the (re-)birth of one dead is
also definite. Therefore in such an unavoidable matter you should not
grieve.

28. O Descendant of Bharata, beings have their beginning in the
unmanifest, in the middle they are manifest, and they end in the
unmanifest. Indeed, what is there to wail about?
To strengthen a bhava (positive feeling), one makes all possible attempts
to reverse his mental state from its ordinary course, and to become aware of
the Self, Atman. This fact should be assimilated by the mind: one who is born
is sure to die. Death is inevitable. When one grieves for the dead or dying, it
is because of his attachment to the temporal and because of lack of awareness
of the eternal. That is why an aspirant should direct all his energy—external
and internal, gross and subtle—toward transforming himself so that he gives
up his identification with the body and the external world and realizes his
identity as the eternal and unchanging Consciousness. Self-transformation is
not only a possibility or probability but the single goal of life. The purpose of
all spiritual paths is to attain that goal. If it is not attained, the highest of all
joys cannot be experienced.
We can easily understand and unveil the mystery of death with a simile.
In our everyday speech, we use the expression: the sun rises and the sun sets.
The rising sun is like birth, and the setting sun is like death. The idea of the
sun rising and setting is taught all over the world. But in fact, the sun never
rises and never sets. It is always there. Because of the poverty of our sense
perception and our limited perspective, we experience the sun as though it
rises and sets. So is the case with the two important events of life: birth and
death. In actuality, one is never born and never dies. Birth and death are
limited conceptions that arise from the limited knowledge of our minds. Sri
Krishna continues his teaching, saying that the bodies that are loved and are
dear to us are merely a part of the grand illusion created by our limited vision
of the whole.
The 28th verse uses the word bhuta, which means being born. When
something appears in the world, it does not come out of nowhere without any
cause. The expression “one is born” means that the same one who existed
before has chosen to assume a new garment. In this way one comes from the
unseen to the seen, from the unknown to the known, from the invisible to the
visible world. That which is hidden behind the curtain comes forward, and
that is called janma (birth). This law of life is applicable to all. Birth and
death is not a mystery to one who has access to travel on all levels of life.
Anything that occurs in the visible world has its roots in the invisible.

Life is like a sentence with many commas, semicolons, and exclamations, but
it does not have a period. This never-ending sentence composes a manuscript
whose beginning and end are lost. But the middle pages of the manuscript
remain with us. By thoroughly studying this fragment, one can catch the
thread of the infinite and touch the eternal.

29. One sees it as a wonder, another speaks of it as a wonder, yet another
fears it as a wonder, and yet another hears of it as a wonder. But even
someone hearing of it does not come to know it.
30. This bodybearer in everyone’s body is eternally undestroyable, O
Descendant of Bharata. Therefore you should not grieve after any and all
beings.
All beings exist in an invisible state and then come to a state of
visibility. Changes occur only on the surface, for the self-existent glory
remains unchanged; changing form does not affect the self-existent Reality.
Atman, the Self of all, dwells in all that is perishable, yet It remains
imperishable. Sri Krishna imparts this knowledge to Arjuna and makes him
aware of the great marvel, Atman. Those who experience Atman completely
lose awareness of the external and go into deep contemplation. All words are
lost to them, for mere words are inadequate to describe the unfathomable
glory of Atman.
The wise do not grieve for either the visible or invisible, seen or unseen.
Weapons have no power to destroy the Self. Therefore there is no cause for
grief. As the Isha Upanishad states, “The unborn, free from change, decay,
and decomposition, Lord of the body, eternal Purusha is not capable of being
killed. It is smaller than the smallest and bigger than the biggest.” The Katha
Upanishad describes it thus: “Many do not have the opportunity to hear about

the Self and even after hearing, many are unable to know It. It is a rare
opportunity for a teacher to expound that knowledge to one who is fully
prepared, for among thousands of aspirants rarely one strives for perfection.”
Imparting the knowledge of Brahma Vidya is the most difficult of all
tasks for the following reasons: (1) Students cannot organize their internal
states due to lack of discipline, and thus their mental energy remains
dissipated; (2) The desire to know Truth is only one of many desires of the
human mind, and without a single and one-pointed desire, one is not able to
direct the course of his life; (3) The modern way of life distracts one with
many preoccupations and involvements; (4) One does not find a suitable and
quiet environment for sadhana; (5) The aspirant is easily swayed by a variety
of philosophical statements and concepts, and so due to lack of experience,
he changes his way of sadhana; (6) For lack of true and selfless guidance
from a competent teacher, the student does not make the decision that
sadhana is his prime duty and that all other duties that he has to fulfill are
only means to attain the goal of sadhana. The goal of sadhana should be
understood comprehensively both in theory and practice before one treads the
path. There are many opportunities, to become lost in the inner jungle of
thoughts, feelings, and desires; (7) The further the aspirant advances in his
experience of the inner levels of life, the greater are the obstacles he finds.
One therefore needs considerable patience.
Unless one follows discipline in all levels of life, regulating the four
primitive urges food, sleep, sex, and self-preservation—sadhana is
impossible. And without sadhana there is no experience of the Self. Five or
ten minutes of practice may give one a bit of solace, but sadhana that is not
motivated toward the attainment of constant consciousness does not lead to
experiential knowledge. For lack of direct experience, one knows yet does
not know. The Upanishads say, “One who believes that Atman can be
comprehended through the knowledge of the mind is ignorant.”
Many aspirants acquire superficial knowledge from reading books or
listening to scholars and then contend that they have acquired profound
knowledge, but they are merely feeding their egos. Thus they create
additional barriers instead of removing those that already exist. The ego
maintains a fortress all the time. It loses consciousness of the Self and forgets
that it is a representative of the Self. That is the prime source of delusion.
One should not merely acquire intellectual knowledge but should
practice self-discipline, which is an essential requisite and not a source of

stress and strain. It is impossible to perform one’s own duty successfully
without being disciplined. It is important to note here that modern teachers
and leaders are not disciplined themselves but nonetheless try to discipline
others. Thus they are not successful. One must first discipline himself before
he can teach others self-discipline.

31. Seeing your righteous duty you should not tremble, for there is
nothing better for a warrior than a righteous battle.
32. Happy are the warriors who find such a battle that has come of its
own momentum and is like an open door to heaven.
Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna that one’s duty is of paramount
importance, for it is the means to fulfill the purpose of life. That which
supports the fulfillment of one’s duty is called dharma. The word dharma
carries a deep and profound meaning. Dharma is not comparable to religion;
it encompasses all the dimensions of life both within and without. It is
applied in every phase of life, as it refers to duties done harmoniously,
skillfully, selflessly, and lovingly. It supports one in fulfilling the purpose of
life and helps one to relate to others and to society in a harmonious way.
At some point every human being becomes confused about his dharma
or duty. Arjuna, a warrior who specializes in the science and art of war,
should learn to practice and perform his duty, so Sri Krishna instructs him not
to think of renouncing his dharma. Instead he shows him the path to follow in
order to fulfill his dharma. For Arjuna, fighting the war is the only dharma
that can open the gate of heaven for him. All the heavenly joys can be
experienced if one learns how to perform his dharma. As it is used here,
heaven means knowledge of the higher dimensions, which frees one from the
apparent reality of the external world. All great traditions of the world
conceive of a heaven that one may attain after death. But those who
understand the science and art of death and dying can glimpse the life
hereafter while still living.
When one learns to study the past, present, and future as different parts

of one whole, he can have a vision of life hereafter, for whatever one was
before, that he is today, and the way one directs the course of his life today
will create his future. After death the individual soul does not go to heaven or
hell but remains in the atmosphere created by his habit patterns. Negative
habits lead to unpleasant experiences, which are called hell, and positive
habits lead to pleasant or heavenly experiences. Heaven is a predetermined
factor that one creates in his unconscious where the habit patterns of merit
and demerit remain lively. No external agent can force another to go to hell
or heaven. Heaven and hell are realities that one creates with his thoughts,
deeds, and habit patterns.

33. And, if you will not do this righteous battle, then abandoning your
duty as well as glory, you will be incurring sin.
Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that if he casts off his duties, he will incur sin.
Although this word is used by orthodox religions all over the world, it has
baffled the theologians of all great traditions. The fear of sin is so deeply
ingrained that even after long austerities, penance, and confessions, one still
has guilt feelings. The belief in sin creates guilt, and guilt creates fear of
punishment.
Yoga science understands sin in a different light. It says that that which
is called sin is actually a behavior that creates obstacles for oneself, and that
behavior can be modified. For example, if I fail to act lovingly I am not
committing a sin that will be punished by an external agent, but I am erecting
a barrier to my realization of my unity with all. That in itself is its own
punishment, and by changing that behavior my suffering is dissolved. One
should, therefore, make sincere efforts rather than focusing on punishment
and becoming afraid. According to yoga science, sin arises from ignorance,
which is the mother of all problems. One commits sins or creates obstacles
because of his negative habits. When one knows that a particular act will
bring disastrous results yet dismisses that truth, he is doing something out of
habit that he should not do. Knowledge means one knows and knows that he
knows, and he performs his duties in accordance with that knowledge and
then does not create obstacles for himself. Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that if he

does not perform his duty he will create obstacles that will prevent him from
fulfilling the purpose of his life.

34. People will be telling unglorious things of you forever, and such ill
repute of someone once honored is worse than even death.
35. The great commanders of chariots will believe you to have withdrawn
from the battle out of fear. Having been much thought of you will be
belittled in their eyes.
36. Those who wish you ill will speak much evil of you, despising your
capacity. What can be more painful than that?
37. Either, having been killed, you will attain heaven, or having won, you
will enjoy the earth. Therefore rise, O Son of Kunti, making the decision to
do battle.
Those who fail to perform their duties consciously and skillfully attain
nothing and are not respected in society. They are bad examples to others,
bringing about the disorganization of society. Sri Krishna leads Arjuna to the
innermost dimensions of life and at the same time makes him aware that his
worldly duties should not be ignored. When a person ignores his duties,
others think disparagingly of him. Ill fame influences one and creates an
inferiority complex. And when one realizes that it is his own mistake that
brought ill fame to him, his inner strength is weakened. One begins to
condemn himself, and suicidal tendencies may develop. We often see great
politicians suffering from such disastrous effects of public opinion. Those
who are stung by negative suggestions become disturbed and unsuccessfully
try to protect their self-esteem.
In all situations the aspirant should learn to maintain his inner strength,

but inner strength cannot be maintained if there is inner conflict and if there is
no clarity of mind. When one is decisive, he preserves his inner strength. Sri
Krishna therefore instructs Arjuna to resolve his conflicts and to perform his
duty. He explains to Arjuna that there is no reason to fear being slain in
battle, for he will then attain heaven. And if he is victorious, he will enjoy the
kingdom of the earth. Sri Krishna makes Arjuna aware that it is his duty to
fight the just war, that his path is the path of righteousness. Arjuna, after all,
is a kshatriya, a warrior. The word kshatriya means one who fights for justice
and truth and protects others from injury. Sri Krishna’s instructions and
guidance strengthen Arjuna’s inner awareness, lead him to perform his duty,
and provide a great lesson for those who have lost their direction because of
the fear of killing or being killed.

38. Holding pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat to be the
same, make ready for battle. Thus you will not incur sin.
Pain and pleasure are two opposites that we experience in daily life, but
they are relative terms. When one sees the horizon through the window, it
appears very limited, but when one goes to the roof, he finds a vast horizon
around him. In the same way, when one learns to expand his vision, the
meaning of pain and pleasure also changes. Pain and pleasure are two
concepts created by our mind and senses when they contact the objects of the
world. But when the sense of discrimination is applied, they vanish because
one’s values change. Pain and pleasure change their values when one attains
a higher dimension of life. One feels pain and pleasure according to his inner
strength, endurance, tolerance, and purpose in life. One’s experience of pain
and pleasure is dependent on what is important to him. For example, a mother
experiences pain when she gives birth to a baby, but she goes through that
pain because she wants to accomplish something higher.
Pain and pleasure have the same source. In the absence of one, the other
appears. For example, if one loses his pen he feels emotional pain, but
finding it gives a pleasant feeling. That which creates pain today can be a
source of joy in the future.
Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna that he should transcend both pleasure

and pain and attain a state of equilibrium. He urges Arjuna to let go of the
pain he is experiencing because of his narrow-mindedness. Pleasure and pain,
victory and defeat, gain and loss should be regarded with detachment and
equanimity. Sri Krishna tells Arjuna to stand and fight with an inner peace
based on that understanding.
In the modern world people become confused about what is right, and
they are uncertain about which duties should be given the highest priority.
The important is always important; therefore it should be attended to first
even though it may seem to be painful. In performing one’s duty one should
learn to go beyond his identification with pleasure and pain, loss and gain,
and all the pairs of opposites.

39. This wisdom I have told you according to the philosophy of
Samkhya; now hear it according to Yoga, the wisdom joined with which, O
Son of Pritha, you will abandon the bondage of karma.
40. There is no loss of initiative on this path nor is there any possibility
of failure. Even a little of this discipline protects one from great danger and
fear.
Sri Krishna has taught Arjuna the philosophy of Samkhya, which helps
one to know that which is the Self and to distinguish It from the non-Self.
Now he begins his teaching of yoga science. Samkhya philosophy teaches
that the Self of all is eternal and immortal and that the world of objects is
transitory and changeable. Samkhya is a philosophy, whereas yoga is the
profound science of sadhana that applies that philosophy. Samkhya and yoga
go hand in hand; without sadhana, philosophy remains mere speculation, and
without philosophy, sadhana remains without a goal. When Samkhya and
yoga are combined, one experiences the philosophical truths directly; they are
no longer mere intellectual concepts. By practicing yoga one can apply the
philosophical truths of Samkhya in his daily life.
The path of yoga teaches those disciplines of sadhana that help the
aspirant in self-unfoldment. Yoga in action means well-disciplined and

skillful action done in a non-attached way, without any expectation of the
fruits of one’s actions. Sri Krishna, the exemplary teacher of yoga science,
explains how to develop equanimity and perform actions skillfully. In the
Isha Upanishad the Vedic sages advocate the same way of performing
actions: “Find delight by renouncing the fruits of your actions. Do not covet.
If you wish to live a long life, learn to perform your actions without
attachment.”
While following the path of dharma and truth, one can temporarily
become confused and commit a mistake, but the quest for dharma and truth
will in itself lead him back to right understanding. He will once more perform
his duties according to his dharma. Following his dharma helps one to be
one-pointed in his thoughts and actions, whereas dissipated and endless are
the thoughts and actions of the irresolute. Furthermore the conscious effort
one makes to follow his dharma has an enduring effect. It is motivation that is
important here. Having a pure motive, one will perform his duty well.
In the path of sadhana no effort is in vain; all sincere efforts bear their
fruits in the unconscious mind according to the inevitable law of karma.
Impressions live in the unconscious, in the storehouse of one’s memory. Even
a little sadhana practiced with sincere effort leaves deep imprints in the
unconscious mind. Those impressions help and guide the sadhaka whenever
he goes off the path. The conscious part of the mind is but a small part of the
whole. It is helpful in communicating with the external world but has very
little use on the inward journey. If the conscious part of the mind is trained
not to create further barriers, then sadhana is useful.
Yoga sadhana alone has explored all the unknown levels of life and is
thus useful for knowing the levels of the unconscious and for training the
totality of the mind. Although modern depth psychology has come a long
way in the last one hundred years in its recognition and exploration of a few
of the layers of the unconscious mind, there is no training program in any of
the educational and therapeutic systems of the world that can help one know
the unconscious to the extent that yoga science can. If one does not know
himself on all dimensions, how can he understand his relationships in the
external world? Sadhana alone is the way of knowing, understanding, and
analyzing the internal states and one’s relationship to the external world.
While treading the path of the inner world, the sadhaka comes in touch
with those potentialities that guide him unconsciously, or sometimes through
dreams, and at other times consciously. Fearlessness thus increases, and self-

reliance is strengthened. He is fully protected by the finer forces that exist,
although he is not aware of them because of his extroverted nature. No
danger can ever befall the sincere sadhaka in his exploration of the inner
realms. The sadhaka is completely protected if he is fully dedicated to the
goal of Self-realization.

41. O Prince of the Kurus, there is only one determinative wisdom, and
the intellects of those who do not have such decisive wisdom are unending,
with many branches.
Merely knowing what to do without one-pointedness of mind will not
lead one to perform his duty accurately. Therefore the desired results will not
be attained. Just as profound knowledge of what to do is essential, so having
a one-pointed mind is equally essential. The modern student tends to know
intellectually but does not make sincere efforts to develop one-pointedness of
mind. Thus his mind remains scattered and all his actions result in
disappointment. For lack of a one-pointed mind, the modern student jumps
from one path to another because he does not understand that it is his
scattered mind that is creating barriers for him. He thinks the barriers are
outside. Assuming that another path or goal will be better is trickery played
by the mind. One already knows what is right, but he does not know how to
put it into practice. In childhood the fundamentals of all great truths are
taught to us. Then we spend energy in trying to apply those truths, but we
fail. We do not realize that with systematic practice we can succeed. The key
point of practice as well as of success lies in one-pointedness of mind.
Attention is the first step on the ladder to develop one-pointedness of
mind. One must pay wholehearted attention to all of the things he does from
morning until evening. The aspirant should also understand why he is acting
in a particular way. Actions should not be performed as a reaction without
understanding why one does them. The human mind is prone to be
reactionary if it is not trained, and an untrained mind creates disorder,
disease, and confusion. If one does something with full attention, he will
increase his awareness and ability to perform his duty. If one forms the habit
of attending fully to whatever he is doing, the mind will become trained, and

eventually concentration will become effortless. It is a great quality for one to
be able to express his knowledge through his speech and action with a onepointed mind. Thousands of thoughts remain waiting to be entertained. The
purpose of sadhana is to attend to those thoughts in a systematic manner so
that they do not create unrest in the inner world. Arjuna is instructed to make
his mind one-pointed before performing his duty.

42. This is the flowery speech that the unwise speak, absorbed in the
discussions of the Vedas, saying ‘There is nothing else.’
43. Totally identified with their desire, intent upon heaven, uttering the
speech that leads to the fruit of karma in the form of rebirth, ample in
specific rituals, resulting in pleasure and power;
44. Since they are attached to pleasure and power and their minds are
plundered by that speech of theirs, their determinative wisdom does not
succeed in leading to samadhi.
Theologians, scholars, and priests theorize and write commentaries on
scriptures such as the Vedas. Yet, however profound their theoretical
knowledge may be, they cannot assimilate that knowledge and live according
to it without sadhana. Intellectualization is easy, but sadhana is difficult.
Many scholars make erudite speeches on the Vedic verses, but they
themselves have not realized the full meaning of those verses. Therefore Sri
Krishna teaches Arjuna to practice and assimilate the knowledge. He urges
him not to be foolish like those who talk on the Vedas but do not practice the
teachings of the Vedas. Such scholars and priests are enveloped with selfinterest; their actions are directed toward mundane and temporal gains and
the attainment of heavenly joys. As a result they become caught in the snare
of births and deaths.
Many religious leaders have forgotten the profound meaning of the great

scriptures and merely use them for their own convenience. Motivated to
attain external pleasures, they involve the innocent in rituals. Much of the
misery we find in society is because of unwise teachings spread by such
religious teachers. It is an irony of human history that religious leaders often
practice religion to achieve selfish ends. In fact, it has become a tradition that
unfortunately misleads the vast majority of society.
A rare few are aware of the fallacies and follies of such selfish leaders
and thus prefer to isolate themselves and practice sadhana. But how many
such people are there in the world, and how much good can they do with their
teachings and writings when the vast majority of religionists preach and teach
meaningless rituals that rob the intelligent of the wisdom of the great
scriptures? The sages who have seen truth face to face and who were able to
touch infinity have always warned sadhakas that real knowledge comes from
earnest sadhana, which leads to direct experience, and not from mere study of
the scriptures. While intellectual knowledge is often used for selfish ends,
those sages knew that truth and selflessness are one. Selflessness is an
acquired taste. When one finds delight in being selfless he can lead, serve,
and love others and even change the course and destiny of nations.
Selfishness feeds the ego, but selflessness leads one to higher levels of
consciousness.

45. The subject of the Vedas is the world consisting of the three gunas. O
Arjuna, be free of the constituent gunas, free of the pairs of opposites;
dwell in the eternal essence, disinterested in worldly and other-worldly
success, having cultivated the Self.
46. The purpose that is served by a small well as compared to water
flooding all around—that much is the meaning in all the Vedic rituals for a
son of God who has supreme knowledge.
Sri Krishna is not condemning the Vedas but is advising Arjuna to go

beyond the three attributes of the human mind to attain a state of equanimity.
The human mind is composed of three gunas (qualities): sattva, rajas, and
tamas. The Vedas explain that these three qualities are present in all that
exists in the phenomenal world and so are also found in all human beings,
though in different grades and degrees. When the sadhaka understands that
the animal tendency is destructive, unhelpful, and of a tamasic nature, he
increases his awareness of his human potentials. In the next stage of
awareness, he realizes the great marvel of marvels: that the essential nature of
his being is divine. He then follows the path of upward travel toward divinity.
Without realizing his divinity, a human being can be successful in the
external world but can never have a tranquil mind, and he is thus unable to
catch a glimpse of the Eternal. He longs to be happy, but that dream is not
fulfilled.
The divine nature in the human being is the sattvic quality of
equilibrium, which gives one freedom from the influences of the pairs of
opposites. Equilibrium is a state of mind attained by human effort. The
aspirant who understands the three qualities of the human mind always
remains vigilant and increases his awareness of sattva. One of the qualities of
sattva is expansion; thus the mind, speech, and action of the sattvic aspirant
follows the law of expansion and not of contraction. Contraction leads one to
feel separate and small, whereas expansion leads one to realize that the Self
of all is his very essence.
Animals are totally dependent on the laws of nature, but human beings
can cross the boundaries of natural law by attaining altered states of
consciousness. The human being is independent in many ways: he has the
ability to fathom the laws of nature by which animals live and to use those
laws for his own ends. The human being alone has enormous capacity to
study the various levels of life that have evolved in the universe. He is divine,
human, and animal all at the same time, and his behavior depends on which
part of him is most developed.
Through direct experience, sages acquire the essential knowledge of the
Vedas; they go to the source from which the Vedic knowledge springs. With
inward sadhana they reach the highest summit from which they can have
profound knowledge of all levels of life and the universe. They find everflowing knowledge within and without. One who is thirsty drinks water, but
one who has quenched his thirst has no need to stoop down to fetch water
from streams and wells. Thus the sage who has become one with Truth has

no need for the incomplete and limited knowledge expressed through words
and concepts.

47. You are entitled only to actions and never to fruits; do not consider
yourself to be a cause of the fruits of actions, nor let your attachment be to
inaction.
After one has attained profound knowledge of all levels of life, what is
the surest way to apply that knowledge so that life becomes meaningful and
fulfilling? Sri Krishna advises Arjuna to become aware of that which is his
and that which is not his. He explains that one has the right to perform his
duty, but he has no right to expect the fruits received therein. Neither duty
performed with the motivation to acquire the fruits of one’s action nor
attachment towards inaction is helpful. Both tendencies are harmful. If the
law of karma is not properly understood, one becomes helpless and inactive,
or he performs actions with attachment to the results and thus becomes
disappointed. Disappointment is a great enemy of self-reliance. It obstructs
the faculty of discrimination, judgment, and decisiveness—the guiding
factors within us.
There are two main principles to be followed when doing one’s actions:
one should not act impulsively but should counsel within before acting, and
one should not perform any action motivated by selfishness. Right action is
superior to inaction. Inaction makes one lethargic, and one who becomes
lethargic postpones his duties and joys, placing them in the hands of his fate
and future. Students are always warned by their teachers not to become
victims of sloth and inactivity, for human beings cannot live without thinking
and acting.
Because of the lack of real guidance, some people today take drugs. If
one takes drugs, he cannot practice sadhana and make his mind one-pointed
and inward. The use of drugs leads to inactivity and then to inertia, and one’s
acts are then prompted by the motivation of tamas. A tamasic person deludes
himself: he thinks that he already knows everything, that he has no need to
learn and to transform himself, and that he therefore does not have to do his
sadhana. He should understand that it is the tamasic quality of mind that

disturbs his motivation for sadhana. Motivation needs proper organization
with the help of steady sadhana and the guidance of a competent preceptor.
Motivation is action in a subtle form. It is what motivates one that is
important because one’s motivation is responsible for molding his thought
patterns and for prompting him to do actions. It is a guiding force, which if
properly used can make one victorious in the external world as well as in the
unfoldment of his inner potentials. There are two kinds of motivation: one
prompts the aspirant to perform actions in the external world, and the other
helps him to make his mind one-pointed and inward. The motivation that
prompts one to perform action with a desire for reward is predominant in the
animal kingdom, so reward and punishment are two methods applied in
training animals. The human being, though a higher species, is also motivated
by reward and punishment. Yet he can go beyond that. Sri Krishna advises
Arjuna to go beyond all expectations, for expectation is the cause of despair
and disappointment.
The human being alone has the gift of judgment, discrimination, and
decision. Every action has its consequent effect, and the fruition of the action
is ordinarily perceived as either a reward or a punishment. But one can
choose to make a loving offering of the fruits of his actions for the benefit of
others. Then one performs his actions skillfully, selflessly, and lovingly,
offering the fruits of his actions for the sake of humanity. Thus he is
constantly praying. Such prayer is actual prayer; it is not at all like the prayer
of egotistical people.
Most people are motivated to do actions for the sake of receiving
rewards. Attachment to rewards is a deep-rooted habit. Most people do not
understand how to be selfless. Such human beings are rajasic. Rewardoriented people are very selfish. They suffer and they make others suffer.
Perhaps that is one reason that the best of men have retreated to forest
dwellings wondering, “Why do human beings still behave like animals?”
After intensive self-study those great ones devised practical methods for
transforming humanity, and they gave us their wisdom through the scriptures.
Suffering comes when one is interested in reward. If one performs
actions expecting rewards, he is bound to receive the fruits of his actions. The
fruits then motivate him to do more actions, and in this way he finds himself
caught in the whirlpool of life, never content, always seeking more and more
for himself and ignoring or using others for his own gain. Actions done for
reward thus create bondage. One becomes a slave to rewards in much the

same way that the rat in sc entific experiments becomes a slave to the pellet
box, performing only those actions that bring him a token reinforcement. But
there is a way to attain release from such enslavement: perform your duties
skillfully and selflessly without attachment to reward. Then you will be free,
a mukta traveling and singing the songs of joy without cares or fears.

48. Perform actions dwelling in yoga, abandoning attachment, O
Conquerer of Wealth, being alike to success and failure. Equanimity is
called yoga.
Verse 48 further explains the way to do one’s actions without creating
conflict and suffering for oneself and for others: one should maintain
equanimity within and harmony between himself and others. Evenness and
tranquility are based on constant awareness of one’s own essential nature,
which is satyam, shivam, sundaram (truth, happiness, and bliss). Unless one
understands the fleeting nature of the pairs of opposites—pain and pleasure,
sorrow and joy—through the help of profound and systematic sadhana, he
cannot go beyond those experiences to attain a state of inner peace.
According to Patanjali, the codifier of yoga science, the practical
methods that are applied to attain perfect control of the mind and its
modifications are called yoga. The yogi who has control of the mind and its
modifications maintains balance of mind and inner composure in all
situations and under all conditions. Those who do not have control of their
minds are lost, for they remain enslaved by the external environment and
their reactions to it.
Modern man does not yet understand the importance and necessity of
controlling the mind. He thinks that it is impossible to understand anything
that cannot be seen with the eyes and touched by the fingers. It has already
been said that such an attitude is the cause of much human misery and the
source of innumerable psychosomatic diseases. If modern man learns to do
some practices that will enable him to understand his internal states and to
organize them in an orderly way, he will free himself from a great deal of
misery and suffering. He will be able to eliminate mental and emotional
turmoil as well as psychosomatic illnesses. One often hears complaints from

so-called rich and well-off people that life is burdensome. The rich man says,
“We have all the comforts and amenities of life but not peace of mind.”
Unless one understands life within as well as without and learns to create a
bridge between these two aspects of life, he will never find peace of mind no
matter how much wealth he possesses. Why do we not learn to spend some
time doing practices that will help us analyze and control our thoughts,
emotions, desires, and appetites?
Those who live in the contemporary world often say that they are not
happy in their present situations, yet they feel compelled to live under the
circumstances in which they find themselves. But what are those
circumstances, and who created them? If one analyzes his circumstances, he
will find that they are actually self-created. The predicaments one
experiences are a result of his disorderly mind, which does not know how to
adjust itself to the various relationships that he has created for himself.
Verily, all miseries are self-created. One should not blame God for one’s own
incompetencies. But modern man feels delight in blaming others for his own
failures. That is merely an escape and only provides temporary relief through
an emotional outburst. Such escape does not work for a long time, for the
reality within eventually compels one to face the facts of life. Throughout the
East and West, individuals and groups suffering from this self-delusion blame
others or God for the situations they themselves create. People have to
perform their duties, and yet they do not like to perform them. That creates
serious conflict and is one of the chief causes of modern illnesses.
When one experiences repeated conflict between his duties and his
desires, various forms of neurotic disorders and psychosomatic disturbances
result. One who performs his duties grudgingly experiences no happiness in
life. Or one may run away from his duties and lead an undisciplined life of
self-interest. Many people remain torn by conflict or plagued by guilt because
they have avoided their duties. Then they experience anxiety, or the anxiety
is expressed in physical symptoms.
Modern psychologists are making futile efforts to probe into the heart of
these disorders, and they have not as yet found adequate methods to resolve
them. Their results are often long in coming and incomplete. The Bhagavad
Gita, however, offers a profound method for removing all such disorders by
leading one to a state of inner composure from which he can perform actions
skillfully and without negative repercussions for himself or others. To attain
this way of being, one must transform himself through sadhana. Harmonious

action in the world will follow later. Without sadhana, peaceful living is not
possible.
In order to achieve successful outcomes from the actions he performs,
one must have a well-balanced mind. When the aspirant understands the
importance of equanimity of mind, he pays attention to his inner organization
and becomes aware of those finer forces that normally remain in a dormant
state. Anything that is within is easily accessible if one follows a definite path
of sadhana. Regardless of which path one follows, if he follows it resolutely
and steadily, he will attain a balanced state of mind and thus will not commit
errors when performing his duties.
When one learns to enjoy the beauty and grandeur of non-attachment, he
acquires the ability to love his duties and comes to experience the offering of
the fruits of his actions as the highest of all joys. Non-attachment becomes a
great delight and the love of his life. Love and non-attachment are
synonymous. One may erroneously believe that non-attachment leads to
inaction and indifference. On the contrary, when one learns to do his duty
with non-attachment, he is performing his dharma with love. Such a yogi
need not seek salvation elsewhere, for he is already a mukta, a free man. He
lives in the world yet is free from it.
One who has learned to surrender all the fruits of his actions in the
service of humanity is constantly praying. He does not create obstacles for
himself. How ironic that most human beings create obstacles for themselves
and then make efforts to remove them! Is that an enlightened way of living?
Many students today waste their time and energy in that sort of folly;
although they work hard, they do not attain anything. The true sadhaka,
however, always remains vigilant and does not slip back to his past habits.
Instead he attains the next level of consciousness.
The yogi should understand two symbols: the lotus, which grows in
water though its petals remain untouched by the water; and the sun, which
shines eternally and equally for all yet remains above and far away,
unaffected by the changes occurring in the world. These are symbols of the
yoga of equanimity, which leads one to perfection.

49. Action is by far lower than the yoga of wisdom, O Arjuna. Seek to
take refuge in wisdom. Those whose actions are causes of fruits are petty
minded.
50. One endowed with wisdom relinquishes here both the good deeds as
well as the bad ones. Therefore be directed toward yoga; yoga is skillfulness
in actions.
51. The wise men endowed with wisdom indeed give up the fruit that
arises from action; liberated from the bondage of birth and its attendant
cycles, they reach the state of wellness and holiness.
After describing the negative effects of working for rewards, Sri Krishna
explains the importance of performing disciplined action with nonattachment. The term buddhi yoga refers to action performed with a mental
attitude of non-attachment to the fruits of one’s action. Buddhi has the ability
to discriminate between the real Self and the non-Self, and with such
discrimination one can develop non-attachment to the non-Self.
A person with a dissipated mind is unable to comprehend the limitless
joy that is experienced by the aspirant who is tranquil, performing his duties
selflessly and skillfully. But when the mind is tranquil, pure reason (buddhi)
is able to function. A tranquil mind alone has the capacity to maintain inner
poise, which inspires and leads one to perform action skillfully and without
attachment to the results. Such actions become a means for fulfilling the
purpose of life. Whereas actions performed with selfish desire bind one to the
objects of the world, actions done with non-attachment lead to complete
freedom.
A disciplined mind and non-attachment are two important requisites for
performing skillful action. If these qualities are absent, the mind is
continually tossed by preoccupation with gain and loss, success and failure.
Such a disturbed and distracted mind is not helpful at all; instead it is
repeatedly a source of disappointment and can create misery, grief, and
sorrow.
Skilled action is the gift of a disciplined mind, and non-attachment is the

gift of buddhi yoga, the yoga of pure reason. Skilled and disciplined action
and non-attachment are separated here only to enable one to understand the
importance of developing both, but actually the two qualities go hand in
hand. Disciplined action is definitely superior to inept and harmful action.
This is clear when we examine the fruits of each. Although disciplined action
brings positive results, one is still not free because those results prompt him
to do more actions. It is not possible through disciplined action alone for one
to come out of the whirlpool created by his actions and the fruits he receives
from those actions. Only when disciplined action is combined with nonattachment is one free from the bondage of his actions.
The deeds performed by one who has a tranquil mind are totally
different from those performed by selfish people who desire to enjoy the
fruits arising from their deeds. When the thought of dedicating and
surrendering the fruits of one’s action is predominant in one’s mind, he is
indeed selfless. A selfless person is concerned with the needs of others; his
focus is on giving rather than on receiving. The family institution helps one
to understand the philosophy of giving. When a man learns to give to his
wife, children, and other family members, he is taking the first step in
learning to give. He can expand that awareness to his neighbor, nation, the
whole of humanity, and to all creatures of the world. Learning to love others
is one side of a coin; the other side is life itself. Without love, life is
impossible, and without life, love is impossible. Love and life are two sides
of the same whole; they are inseparable—nay, they are one and the same!
In modern life instead of learning to give, everyone in the family expects
to receive without giving. Whereas giving is an expression of selflessness,
expectation is an expression of selfishness. A selfish husband and father uses
his wife and children to satisfy his ego. He does not know the law of giving.
When this way of being is typical, the family institution radiates hatred
instead of radiating love, and chaos is created in society.
When one has expectations he is never fulfilled, but giving is a
fulfillment in itself. The truth that every action has a reaction is
acknowledged equally by philosophers and scientists. Expectation rebounds
on the human being, and so does love. When one has expectations the result
is dissatisfaction, disappointment, distress, sorrow, and pain. But when one
gives there is a feeling of satisfaction and contentment through and through.
The reaction received from giving is fulfillment. The wise person gives for
another reason as well: he knows that the expectation of receiving rewards

brings those rewards, and then he will become caught in the whirlpool of
attachment and bondage to those rewards. That leads to a kind of suicide, for
one becomes smothered by his accumulated possessions.
The Upanishads say, “Enjoy through renunciation, for that is the way of
salvation.” But the question arises: How is it possible for one to live in the
world and to discharge his duties without becoming attached to the objects of
the world? The Bhagavad Gita explains that this can be accomplished by
developing the understanding that all things of the world, animate and
inanimate, are not ours. We have the right to use and enjoy them but not the
right to possess them. This teaching is like a ray of light that tears the veil of
false identity and possessiveness, which always creates misery. One should
have an exact, profound, and comprehensive attitude toward life. He should
understand the law of action and reaction and the importance of giving up
possessions. Otherwise the joy of giving and loving is changed into sorrow
and misery. But instead of understanding this fact, modern man becomes
overwhelmed by the sense of ownership. And when one possesses something
that does not really belong to him, he lives as a thief and not as a free man.
Intellectuals raise the question: If one does not desire the fruits of action,
will he be motivated to act? In response to this question, the sages who have
trodden the path and graciously left their footprints for us to follow have said
again and again, “Have a desire so that you perform the action, but do not
have a selfish desire, for selfish desire is the very source of misery, but
selfless desire brings joy and makes you free.” When surrendering the fruits
of actions becomes the basis of one’s life, he knows nothing but giving. And
at that stage further knowledge is not needed, for one has already attained the
goal of life. He realizes his oneness with all and lives in that realization.
Therefore, give up all the fruits of your actions to others and live in perennial
happiness.

52. When your intellect overcomes and crosses the confused mass of
delusion, then you will reach the state of dispassion concerning all that you

have heard and learned and all that you have yet to hear and learn.
53. When your intellect, previously confused by the variety of teachings,
remains firm and unmoving in samadhi, then you will attain yoga.
These verses explain the evolving state of buddhi. When buddhi soars
high, tearing the veils of delusion, one rises above all intellectual pursuits.
The teachings that may be encountered from outside are already accessible
through buddhi and are fully grasped. All knowledge is known to such a one,
and he attains the highest state of yoga. When buddhi is fully developed, one
has freedom from the mire of delusion, for he has unalloyed knowledge. Pure
buddhi is able to unfold all the secrets of the universe, and all the feebleness
and conflicts of the mind are resolved.
The lower mind (manas) is that part of the mind which functions by
employing the senses to receive knowledge from the external world and
employing the organs of action to act upon the external world. All sense
perceptions are filtered in a system of conceptualization. A disorganized and
uncontrolled mind does not have exact perceptions and thus cannot
conceptualize or act accurately. A clouded mind that receives its information
through untrained senses forms distorted concepts and remains deluded. But
the mind that learns to consult and seek the counsel of buddhi and forms the
habit of not initiating action without a decision from buddhi is a wellcontrolled mind, and it can conceptualize and act in a useful, efficient, and
harmonious way. When the lower mind, with the help of sadhana, constantly
listens to buddhi with one-pointedness, there is no danger of committing
errors.
There are two different states of buddhi: lower buddhi and higher
buddhi. The lower buddhi gives diverse instructions one after another, but
with its pure reason the higher buddhi gives firm instruction for the benefit of
the whole being. It is aware of the source of consciousness within and at the
same time has discriminatory knowledge of the external world. All the great
spiritual leaders like Buddha, Krishna, Jesus, and Moses acted with the help
of pure reason, which is called higher buddhi. Pure reason or higher buddhi is
completely sattvic without any tinge of rajas or tamas. Those who have
complete mastery over their internal states acquire the gift of pure reason, and
then no one in any circumstances can ever change the course of their actions.
Socrates, even while drinking the goblet of hemlock, did not alter his
convictions. Jesus on the cross did not say, “Forgive me. Don’t crucify me.”

With the help of the same pure reason and firm faith, Moses asked the sea to
part and create a path. Pure reason, firm faith, and will power function
together and make a great force that can perform all manner of wonders. In
such a state all the functions of mind work in a unified way, and there is no
doubt at all.
According to Eastern psychology, the ego or sense of I-ness is like a
rock without buddhi; it is dumb and deaf. But Western psychologists attribute
all the qualities of buddhi to the ego because they do not have the
comprehensive knowledge of the various faculties of mind. Their way of
analysis involves knowing through the intellect, logic, and external
observation, whereas the perennial psychology of the East has differentiated
various functions of the mind with the help of discipline and the introspective
method of inner sadhana. This method is based on direct inward knowledge,
whereas the methods of modern psychologists rely on the collection of data
from external observation. Western psychologists have begun to realize that
the study of the waking state alone is not sufficient, and they are now probing
into one level of the unconscious, the dream state. But there are other subtle
dimensions of life that are part of the unconscious that are not explored by
modern psychology. Modern psychologists do not understand that which is
beyond observation and the analysis of thoughts and emotions.
According to Eastern psychology, there are subtle dimensions of life still
to be explored by the West. Suppose a mosquito bites someone who is in
deep sleep. His fingers reach for the bite, yet he is not aware of it. What is
that level of life that remains awake recording such occurrences even during
the sleeping state? The perennial psychology of the East has answers to these
questions. According to that psychology, it is not the mind that goes through
the waking, dreaming, and sleeping states. The mind shares the experiences,
but it is actually the individual self (jiva), which is quite different from the
ego, that experiences the waking, dreaming, and sleeping states. The
individual self presents a personality of its own, for it uses a particular
vehicle called the unconscious, which is the reservoir of all the past
impressions of mind, action, and speech. As long as the self uses the
unconscious as a vehicle, it is called jiva, but the moment the Self renounces
the vehicle, it is called pure consciousness.
As long as the intellect is clouded, one remains selfish, and as long as he
remains selfish, the mind is impure. One then depends on others and loses
self-reliance. He collects pleasurable objects and remains deluded and allured

by the temptations of the external world. His troubles increase day by day,
and sunk in immense sorrow, he struggles for peace. In the course of seeking
truth, he may meet a sadhaka or spiritual guide. Then alone does he think of
coming out of the mire of delusion created by his selfishness. He begins to
cast off his infatuations and to seek practical methods of ridding himself of
the impurities of the mind and intellect.
Scriptural knowledge has its importance, for it inspires the aspirant on
the path of sadhana; the scriptures constantly remind the sadhaka of the goal
of his life. But how did these scriptures come into existence, and why are
they accepted as testimony in guiding sadhakas? Sveta Upanishad says that
the great sages in deep contemplation and in the highest state of tranquility
came in touch with the supernatural power and thus experienced the profound
knowledge and wisdom of the timeless and infinite eternal Truth. If the
sadhaka systematically practices fathoming all the levels of life and goes to
the source from which the wisdom of the Vedas flows, he will experience the
direct knowledge that is higher than the knowledge received by hearing the
Vedic scriptures and their interpretations.
The knowledge attained through sadhana is higher than any other source
of knowledge. There are three accepted methods of attaining this wisdom,
and there are three aspects of one’s being that need to be controlled and
disciplined. Numerous paths are described in various traditions, but among
these paths prayer, meditation, and contemplation have been universally
accepted and verified by the ancients. Discipline of mind, action, and speech
are auxiliary, preliminary, and essential steps in each of these three different
approaches. Let us explain and understand each of these distinct approaches
separately.
Prayer purifies the way of the soul; it is a means to expand one’s
consciousness within. It is not a mere petition but makes the mind aware of
the dimension of life that is the very source of one’s being. Prayer has
immense power and can lead one to the highest state of ecstasy. It is the way
of using emotional power by awakening, evoking, and transforming it.
History reveals that constant prayer can transform human beings. There is no
doubt that if prayer is properly practiced, positive results are imminent.
There are two types of prayer. The inferior type of prayer is egocentric
prayer. It is used by the selfish person who merely desires to fulfill his wants.
“I” remains the center of such prayer: “O Lord, give me this, do this for me,
help me to have this object.” This sort of prayer, full of wants, is used just to

fulfill one’s selfish ends. Though it works, it does not lead one to nearness to
the Absolute. Such prayer, regularly conducted in all great religions, reduces
the magnanimity of prayer to a selfish petition. It does not lead one to go
beyond the mire of delusion created by the ego.
When the aspirant understands that possession of the mundane objects
of the world for which selfish people pray does not make one happy, he
realizes that egocentric prayers have limited effects with limited gains. He
begins thinking, “I am committing a mistake somewhere. Either my method
of prayer is incomplete or my motives are not right” Egocentric prayer is thus
discarded by the true aspirant, and then he seeks the higher way of prayer:
God-centered prayer. God-centered prayer gives immense joy to the human
mind. Those who practice this approach believe that God is a being who has
full power to fulfill the desires of human beings. Overwhelmed with this idea,
they pray to God to give them strength, wisdom, and skill so that they can
discharge their duties efficiently and at the same time understand the meaning
of life. In God-centered prayer one does not leave all the human
responsibilities to God with the expectation that God will take care of those
responsibilities, but one prays to God to give him strength so that he can
understand and fulfill his duties and serve others selflessly. This type of
prayer expands one’s consciousness, whereas ego-centered prayer envelops
one with selfish words and makes one small, petty minded, greedy, and
inconsiderate. The Lord’s Prayer is an example of God-centered prayer. It is a
glorification of God and has no selfish motivation; it is like a stream crying to
meet the ocean. In God-centered prayer, the individual accepts God in his life
as a guide, leader, and judge of his actions and speech.
Prayer is very useful, but at the same time it advocates and promotes the
philosophy of dualism, which asserts that man and God remain forever
distinct. The individual always remains an individual, and there is no union
with God, only a nearness to God. Dualism is an acceptance of two separate
existences. There has been a great deal of debate by scholars about whether
dualism is a valid philosophy. The validity of the dualistic approach is not a
matter to be debated. Dualism should be understood as a stage of sadhana
that provides a path that can eventually lead to the higher realm of
knowledge, that of complete unity. It is valid as a preliminary stage of
sadhana, as an experience on the way to the realization of the Absolute.
The next approach is deeper, more profound and systematic, and is
suitable to explorers and yogis. It is called meditation. Meditation is an

inward method in which a systematic study is conducted to gain knowledge
of the Absolute. It goes beyond prayer to help one realize the higher
dimensions of life. In this approach it is believed that the human being is a
dweller in two worlds, the world within himself and the world outside. One
develops profound self-mastery so that he is able to go to the Source of
consciousness through a meditative method and to simultaneously develop
the ability to perform his duties skillfully, selflessly, and lovingly. Meditation
thus has two aspects: meditation in silence and meditation in action. The
Bhagavad Gita teaches both. Many scholars, however, do not know how to
practice meditation and do not understand how the meditative mind can be
capable of performing skillful actions. But karma yoga (the yoga of action)
and dhyana yoga (the yoga of meditation) cannot be separated. One who has
the ability and capacity to meditate in silence also has the capacity to perform
his duties skillfully. Sincerity, truthfulness, and purity of heart are
prerequisites for the method of prayer, but in meditation, stillness, even
breathing, withdrawal of the senses, calming down the conscious mind, going
beyond the unconscious, and finally attaining the state of tranquility or
samadhi are the systematic steps one has to follow.
Many incomplete methods are practiced these days, and according to
their advocates these methods are the only way. Such claims by bogus
teachers are laughable. Meditation as taught by Patanjali’s method is a
systematic approach, like climbing a ladder and finally reaching the highest
rung, the state of samadhi. It is not at all religious, and to give it religious
color, as some mistakenly do, is to vulgarize a purely scientific and
methodical way of attaining samadhi, a state in which all of one’s questions
are resolved. Samadhi is the goal of the meditator. In that supreme state,
which bestows serenity in all conditions, the individual unites himself with
the self-existent Reality. There are no short cuts such as those taught by many
modern teachers. Meditation is a discipline that must be resolutely practiced
if one is to be transported from the physical to the subtlest aspect of his being
and finally to that fountainhead of life and light where the purest
consciousness perennially resides in all its glory.
Marvelous results can be observed when the method of meditation is
introduced gradually, step by step. Meditational therapy is the highest of all
therapies, providing that the therapist is competent and knows how to apply
this form of therapy systematically.* All other methods of therapy offer only
momentary relief, and often one becomes dependent on the therapist. In

meditational therapy, however, the student is led toward self-reliance, selfexamination, self-verification, self-analysis, and self-attainment.
Modern students often ask the question, “How many days, months, or
years must we train ourselves?” That depends upon the aspirant’s sincerity,
determination, and one-pointedness of mind and on how regularly he
practices. The Bhagavad Gita teaches meditation in action, meditation in life,
and Arjuna learns this method and becomes enlightened. The teachings of the
Bhagavad Gita last for only eighteen days, and these eighteen days of
teaching encompass the entire knowledge that one needs in order to have a
comprehensive knowledge of Atman, the Self, which is the Self of all. In
meditation itself, the time factor is annihilated because meditation is a state of
mind beyond the prime conditionings of time, space, and causation.
Ordinarily the student should first learn to rid himself of his old habits and
the stains of the samskaras and impressions of his past deeds, which create a
setback in his inward journey. The time factor totally depends on the
individual. If the student is like Arjuna and if his teacher is like Sri Krishna,
enlightenment will come very fast, but if he does not meditate and follow the
other practices regularly with full determination, progress can be very slow.
The third approach, that of contemplation, is practiced by a fortunate
few. To perform skillful action with non-attachment, one must sharpen his
faculty of discrimination, judgment, and decisiveness. Knowledge flows from
within, and the external world is the field of expression of that knowledge
through various avenues that are available to us mainly mind, action, and
speech. Contemplation is not an unorganized way of thinking; it is a precise
method. For contemplation one must train buddhi in all its aspects. A trained
buddhi has pure reason, and pure reason has immense power to lead the
aspirant to the door of liberation. First the student listens to the scriptures and
studies them under the guidance of a competent teacher, an enlightened one
who has gained direct knowledge and who is able to understand the subtleties
of the teachings of the great ones. Then, like a humming bee, with great joy
he collects fragrances from different flowers and converts them into honey.
The first step is called sravana, and the second is called manana. One then
attains the third step, called nididhyasana, which means assimilating the
knowledge one has gained and living according to it. After attaining that step,
sakshatkara, in which the knowledge of the whole is revealed, occurs.
We have described three approaches in brief. Now we will explain the
importance of discipline, without which one cannot be successful in any of

these approaches. Discipline should be practiced on three levels: mind,
action, and speech. The human being knows everything that he ought to
know about how to live in the world and how to relate to others. He has been
taught, for example, the importance of being kind and gentle. But one does
not know how to put those principles into practice. The emphasis of this
commentary is therefore on practice. As our gurudeva used to say, “Do not
waste your time thinking and planning to follow the path. Decide and just
follow.”
Spiritual sadhana requires the discipline of mind, action, and speech.
Even preliminary discipline of mind, action, and speech can lead one to the
experience of supernatural phenomena not ordinarily experienced by students
who collect information but do not practice. Sometimes the great swamis,
sages, and yogis who have practiced discipline speak with profound certainty,
and whatever they say happens exactly as they said it would. They do not
care to debate about what truth is; they simply say that when one practices
non-lying, he speaks the truth. We have recorded many instances in which a
sage has said something that seems impossible, yet it happens just as he said.
By following samyama (discipline), one can perform such miracles. A
miracle is a miracle only as long as one does not know how it came about;
the moment that is known, it is no longer a miracle. If one wastes his power
of speech indulging in useless discussions, talking nonsense, lying
intentionally, hurting others through his speech, condemning others, or
speaking against another’s religion, vak shakti (the power of words) does not
find effective expression through his speech. But if one conserves his power
of speech and does not lie, his speech can become so powerful that whatever
he says will come to pass.
If one also disciplines his actions by not doing what is not to be done, he
will find that he is doing his actions more efficiently and more accurately
than before. The question may arise: How can one know what is not right?
The answer is that one’s conscience already knows what is right and wrong,
good and bad, helpful and unhelpful. One simply has to tune into his inner
conscience, which guides him all the time. That is called seeking counsel
within before performing action. It has already been explained that one
already knows—he simply has to practice. In the course of practicing not
doing that which is not to be done, one will find that he is being guided from
within. Then he can learn to develop a dialogue with his conscience, which is
not polluted by the fickleness and feebleness of the mind. Experimenting in

this way leads one to understand that the real counselor is within each person.
The first and foremost duty of a true and selfless teacher is to introduce
his student to that inner guide which leads one during the waking, dreaming,
and sleeping states. When one takes a few moments from his busy life and
learns to sit calmly in a quiet place, the inner counselor begins counseling. It
would be helpful if modern therapists and psychologists, as well as priests
and spiritual teachers, would learn to listen to the inner counselor and then
introduce that inner guide to their clients and students.
After practicing disciplined action and speech and studying their
marvelous effects, one should learn to understand and practice mental
discipline. When one does not allow his mind to think that which is negative
and which makes him depressed and sad, his mind begins forming new habits
of joy. Slowly he begins discriminating between helpful thoughts and those
unhelpful thoughts that consume more human energy than anything else. This
introspective (inspecting within) method leads one to the next step:
witnessing. Here one learns to witness all that happens, both in the external
and internal worlds, without becoming involved in it. While one is still
learning, he must be patient and not become disappointed if at times he fails
to remain a witness but instead becomes emotionally caught up in what is
taking place. In pursuing such a self-training program, one should make a
commitment to himself for the sake of his growth that he will practice
regularly and faithfully no matter what. This is not the same as following a
commandment or a blind injunction. Many people are afraid to make
commitments because they believe that by not making commitments they
will be free, but lack of commitment is merely irresponsibility and does not
bring about true freedom. When one is afraid to make a commitment, it is
because he is fearful of accepting responsibility, but real freedom is attained
only when one is no longer a slave of his emotions and mental life. To be
responsible is to be strong. With the help of mental discipline, one’s internal
organization can be arranged in a way that prevents emotional disturbances
and physical maladies.
After understanding the importance of the discipline of mind, speech,
and action and after practicing that discipline regularly for some time, one
experiences certain extraordinary phenomena that are based on those realities
that cannot be understood by the conscious mind. In each approach, whether
it be prayer, meditation, or contemplation, discipline plays a role, like that of
a father who protects his loving child with his tender arms and loving

teachings.

Arjuna said
54. What is the description of a person of steady insight who remains in
samadhi, O Krishna? How does a person of stable wisdom speak forth?
How does he sit? How does he walk?
The path of equanimity does not promise that one will attain godhood,
but it will lead one to attain a state of tranquility, a state of perfection free of
misery and pain. In this verse the word sthita-prajna (steady insight) carries
deep meaning. Arjuna asks his revered teacher to describe the man of
perfectly poised discernment who has established himself in his essential
nature. How does he speak? How does he sit? How does he walk, and how
does he carry out his duties? How can one know that a person has attained an
equable state of perfection?
Arjuna’s question carries great meaning and is equally valuable to
modern man. He wants to know the definite signs and symptoms that denote
that one has attained a state of equanimity. Since all human beings express
themselves through speech and actions in much the same manner, how does
the behavior of the great man differ from that of the ordinary man? How does
the great man express his thoughts, emotions, and desires? How is his mind,
action, and speech guided by his inner attainment of tranquility? The ancients
developed a behavioral psychology of considerable breadth. They not only
studied the motivations of one’s behavior but also the behavioral signs and
symptoms of various internal states and the means for modifying behavior. In
many cases, signs and symptoms help one to analyze the behavior of a human
being but not in all cases. For example, a person may cry because of intense
unhappiness, because he is touched by an expression of love or beauty, or
because he identifies with someone who is suffering. Therefore we cannot
know the reason by merely observing the behavior. In order to analyze
human behavior, one must also probe into the deeper level from whence all

emotions spring.
The signs and symptoms of one who has inner balance and poise—the
way such a one speaks, acts, and sits—are different from those of the human
being who has not disciplined himself and has not attained a state of
equanimity. Having a tranquil mind, the man of equanimity sits in a calm,
still posture. He walks with full confidence, without any fear or uncertainty.
He speaks with clarity of mind in a straightforward way.
All men can be divided into two categories: there is the man of
equanimity and the man of disharmony. The man of equanimity is the ideal
man of the Bhagavad Gita. He remains undisturbed, unattached, happy, and
joyous in all external circumstances, but the man of disharmony is
completely uncoordinated and suffers from lack of discipline and awareness.
The majority of individuals in society are of the latter type; they do not
practice any self-discipline. Therefore their behavior is uncoordinated, and
for lack of coordination, unity is not attained. We see this confusion all over
in the East and West. The highest method of education known so far is selfeducation and self-training, but without discipline it is not possible to educate
oneself.
The Bhagavad Gita, and this verse in particular, is closely related to the
Mandukya Upanishad, one of the best and perhaps most thought-provoking
books in the library of man today. The Mandukya Upanishad thoroughly
explains three states of mind: waking, dreaming, and sleeping.* The
explanation of these states has been expanded in the Mandukya karika
(commentary) by Gaudapada, the great grandmaster of Shankara. The man
who has attained equanimity can survey each of these three states of human
experience at once, while at the same time maintaining his position in the
state beyond, called turiya. Deep sleep is very close to the state of turiya, but
in deep sleep one is not aware, while in turiya unbroken consciousness exists.
The purpose of the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita is to lead Arjuna and all
the Arjunas of the world to attain the state of turiya. That state is the highest
that can ever be experienced. One who experiences turiya is called a man of
equanimity.
For the ordinary man, waking, dreaming, and sleeping are three different
realities, and he is not at all aware of the fourth. However, one who has
attained the timeless state of equanimity has gone beyond all conditionings of
time—past, present, and future—and for him everything is here and now. The
words “here and now” are commonly used, but only a few accomplished ones

have experiential access to this reality, for it is a part of eternity. When past
and future are available to be experienced here and’ now, one has attained a
timeless state and thus has become an inseparable part of infinity. Infinite
knowledge then remains at his disposal.
Ordinary people experience the reality of the waking, dreaming, and
sleeping states separately, but one who has gone beyond and has attained the
summit can clearly observe the functionings of consciousness in these three
spheres of human experience as a single line that is continuous rather than
broken into three parts. For the man of equanimity the three phases are one
and the same conscious and continuous reality, just as morning, noon, and
evening are each aspects of a single day. The man of partial and limited
knowledge remains in doubt and confusion about the meaning and purpose of
his life because he knows only a part and does not have a profound
knowledge of the whole. But the great man remains undisturbed and in
perfect poise even on the battlefield, for he has discovered the mysteries of
both the known and unknown, the eternal and the non-eternal. Such a warrior
is victorious in all times, conditions, and states.
The dreaming state is a state of unfulfillment. But that state of mind
does have some therapeutic value, for it gives one the opportunity to express
all his unfulfilled and suppressed desires. A study of dreams can help one to
understand the two lives that we live. One is the conscious life, and the other
is that which is forgotten. We think that our forgotten life does not influence
our waking life, but that is not true. Dreams are evidence that forgotten,
suspended, undealt with, and unfulfilled desires remain sleeping in the
unconscious and rise again when there is sufficient reason.
The waking state is experienced by a very small part of the mind and is
in no way capable of comprehending the meaning of the whole. Our modern
methods of education and training are imperfect because they focus only on
that small aspect of the totality of our internal organization. Here lies the
tragedy and bankruptcy of the modern way of life and education, that which
is the cause of misery in the world today. Why haven’t we devised inner
methods and made them available for all so that everyone has access to all the
states of one’s being? Such education was available in ancient times, but it
has been largely forgotten today. Modern therapists and psychologists have
started probing into the dreaming state, but their exploration is still in an
infant stage and needs different methods. They do not have a practical
training program to explore the many aspects of the unconscious mind. The

Bhagavad Gita, however, offers the knowledge that can help the modern
therapist to know the unknown dimensions of life.
Arjuna’s questions show that he has come out of his state of
despondency. He now intently follows Sri Krishna’s teachings and is eager to
know more about the state of inner discrimination. Sri Krishna has led Arjuna
from the most despondent state of consciousness to the state of balance and
inner poise. By analyzing Arjuna’s thoughts, actions, and speech, one can
clearly understand the differences between these two states. In his former
state Arjuna was ignorant, depressed, weak, and full of fear and anxiety. But
his questions show that he is now on the path of wisdom and in the process of
self-transformation. He is an entirely different person.
When one practices sadhana, a transformation takes place, and the
thoughts and behavior of the aspirant change drastically. The power of selftransformation is our most important human resource. If the individual can be
transformed, the whole of humanity can be transformed. Will there be a day
when human society makes good use of this self-transformation process?
That will be possible when the educational system includes those methods of
self-discipline by which one can attain the free spirit of the man of
equanimity.

The Blessed Lord said
55. When one entirely abandons all the desires that come into the mind,
O Son of Pritha, satisfied within the Self by the Self, then he is called a
person of stable wisdom.
56. One whose mind is not agitated in sorrows, who has no attraction
toward pleasures, he from whom attraction, fear, and anger have
disappeared, such a meditator is called a person of stable wisdom.

57. He who has no attachment directed toward anything, or upon
attaining anything good or bad, who neither greets it nor hates it, his
wisdom is established.
When the aspirant realizes that the external world is but a reflection of
the ultimate Reality and that although the reflection appears to be real, it is
not actually so, the objects of the world lose their value for him. He thus
experiences the first important step of freedom in the journey to the timeless
infinity. Such a one, following the way of inward experiences, finally attains
contentment, for he knows the Self. The Self is known by the Self, and not
through any other means. When one makes practical use of this knowledge,
he attains a state of non-attachment and is no longer bound by likes, dislikes,
hatred, or lust. Then one is free from all emotions, desires, and appetites, and
this freedom is very valuable in the path to perfection. There is no power that
can take this awareness away from him.
Only a skilled and disciplined aspirant can understand the expressions,
ideas, speech, and actions of the realized one who has attained the state of
equanimity. The first and foremost sign one notices in such a person is the
tranquility of his mind, which is totally without desire. Such a person is an
example to others: he lives as though he were in a glass house from which he
can see everyone and everyone can see him. That way of living and being is
attained through a gradual sadhana in which the aspirant first learns to choose
helpful thoughts, emotions, and desires and to abandon those that are not
helpful. In the next stage he learns to abandon both good and bad and to
witness all of the happenings in the external world, whether they spring from
nature or from human society.
Desires have their origin in the primitive fountains of food, sex, sleep,
and self-preservation. When one learns to regulate those primitive fountains,
desires lose their power over him, and he is no longer a slave but a master.
Many naive students think that the worldly objects one possesses must be
surrendered or abandoned, but the implication here is entirely different.
Surrender has nothing to do with the objects of the world but with the desires
that create limitations and conditionings of the mind.
The play of desires exists only in the waking and dreaming states.
Desires remain dormant in the state of deep sleep, but one is not conscious in
that state. When one is in samadhi, however, he is beyond the states of
waking, dreaming, and deep sleep and remains in a perfect state of

consciousness in which desires are completely absent. The consciousness of
samadhi is not at all like the consciousness of the waking state, which is just
a fragment of the totality of consciousness. The consciousness of samadhi is
as wide as infinite space; it is all-inclusive and is an unlimited and perennial
source of knowledge. The three lower states—waking, dreaming, and
sleeping—are experienced by all creatures. But the fourth state, the highest
state of equilibrium, is attained only by the true aspirant.

58. When, like a tortoise withdrawing his limbs, one withdraws each and
all of the senses from their objects, his wisdom is established.
When one gives up his desires, a new horizon of awareness opens to
him. But those who hold on to their desires are not able to experience the
higher dimensions of life. Fulfilling desires gives birth to many more desires,
and there is no end to that cycle. When one learns to give up desires,
however, he is elevated to the next step of experience. There is a mental law
that if you give up what you have, you receive something new. That principle
sustains life. If we do not give up the carbon dioxide and used up gases by
exhaling, we cannot survive at all; we must exhale in order to inhale. In order
to survive and to receive, we have to give up. Give up first; only then will
you receive. This law continues to help one until the last breath of life. The
student is always afraid and hesitant about giving up, for he is attached to all
of the things that he thinks belong to him. His false sense of possessiveness is
a great enemy on the path of unfoldment. One must learn to have courage and
give up what he has in order to receive that which is glorious and beautiful,
limitless and infinite.
One of the most important things to be given up is attachment to sensory
experience. Withdrawal of the mind from the senses (pratyahara) is given a
great deal of importance in the path of meditation, but no book specifically
describes this process. Students think it is something that will make them
passive, but that is incorrect. It is a skill to have complete control and
command over the senses, which are employed by the mind to go to the
external world and perceive things. The senses create a serious disturbance,
for it is their inherent nature to jump from one object to another, compelled

by the charms and temptations of the external world. The mind is disturbed
and dissipated by such input and is unable to conceive of things as they are.
Furthermore the perceived objects are a source of distraction and dissipation;
they create serious obstacles and obstructions for the sadhaka in his attempts
to fathom higher levels of consciousness. Therefore it is important to
withdraw one’s senses from the world of objects. This is not withdrawal from
the world or from one’s duties. It is learning to gather one’s scattered energy.
Withdrawal of the senses is an essential part of sadhana.
There is a very serious problem with the habitual way of perception: the
senses have no capacity or ability to know things as they are. They can only
have a partial glimpse of an object. That partial view of the object is
charming and compelling, and it disorganizes and distorts the human mind. It
only gives an inkling of delight and is not able to provide long-lasting joy
because the senses have limited powers to know objects as they are.
There are three serious obstacles that interfere with one’s ability to have
a comprehensive view of the objects of the world: (1) The mind remains
clouded; (2) The clouded mind uses incompetent senses to know the objects
of the world; (3) The objects of the world change continually. These three
problems lead to self-delusion, and one’s ignorance regarding the objects of
the world is not dispelled. There is an inborn desire in the human mind and
heart to know what is real and what is illusory. But ordinarily the mind does
not know how to do that. No matter how much training is given to the senses,
the senses do not have the capacity to see things as they are. With the desire
to experience the whole as it really is, the mind searches for a different
approach, one that does not rely on the senses. It is only with pure reason that
the mind can know the nature of the objects of the world, for due to their
shallow nature, the senses can never peep into the secrets of the unknown
side of the objects. No matter how powerful are the instruments used to see
the objects as they are, they fail, for they have no power to reveal the true
nature of the objects of the world.
There is a systematic method that one can apply to purify the mind so
that there is clarity in his knowing. One can focus the mind on one single
object—it can be concrete or abstract, large or small—so that the mind
withdraws itself from the senses. When the mind is voluntarily isolated and
under perfect control, it attains one-pointedness. And if that one-pointedness
is turned inward, it becomes a useful means on one’s inward journey to
another way of knowing. The human being is like a miniature world, so by

turning inward and examining himself, one can examine the nature of the
universe. The natural tendency of the senses is to lead the mind to the objects
of the world. The method that we are explaining is a very beneficial and
useful voluntary effort that enables one to see, examine, and verify the nature
of the objects of the world. And at the same time it makes one realize that the
objects of the world do not hold any quality to charm and tempt the mind, for
temptations and charms are created by the false input of the limited senses.
The concentrated power of mind has the ability to know without the help
of the senses. In the inner world, the mind does not even need the help of the
brain. The brain is only a medium for the energy called mind. It is a
powerhouse, not the power; it is a distribution center but not the energy.
Many modern physicists do not accept this theory, for they know only one
method: applying sophisticated instruments to amplify sensory experiences.
When one uses such instruments to study mental functions, they fail, for
these instruments can only measure the superficial workings of the brain.
Those who follow this method nevertheless contend that the brain is the
mind, and that if they can develop the instruments to study the brain’s
functioning they will be able to understand the mind. They are like the blind
man who holds the tail of an elephant and contends that an elephant is like a
snake because its tail feels like one.
Modern technology and scientific knowledge are valid as far as the
external world is concerned. But there is another exact science that helps one
know the unknown dimensions of life. The Samkhya system of philosophy
has given birth to yogic science. It is far more advanced and methodical than
modern technology and the scientific method that is being used to probe into
the microscopic and macroscopic levels of the physical universe.
Because of the limited nature of the senses and the foibles of the mind,
one builds his own concepts, which offer a distorted picture of the world. The
mind is a huge catalog of conceptions, and it uses these to create a philosophy
that is neither reliable nor trustworthy. In order to avoid self-delusion, the
sadhaka should understand the importance of voluntary withdrawal of the
senses, and then he should make the mind one-pointed and turn it inward.
There he will find a higher knowledge that is not contaminated by either the
senses or the distracted and dissipated mind.
According to yoga philosophy and psychology, the human being goes
through two distinct stages in his journey to Self-awakening. The first stage is
traditionally referred to as evolution. In this process, consciousness travels

from its subtlemost aspect through ever more gross aspects of existence,
obscuring all awareness of oneself as pure Consciousness. Finally one
becomes completely identified with the external world. In the second stage,
which is traditionally referred to as involution, one reverses direction: he
turns inward and commences a journey in which he rediscovers and
experiences ever more subtle aspects of his being, finally coming to realize
himself as pure Consciousness. Sensory withdrawal is one of the first
important steps in the process of involution, a voluntary withdrawal in which
the human mind is turned within. The sadhaka goes against the process of
evolution, and that is just like going against the currents of a river. One needs
to be well equipped for such an undertaking, for his habits and past
experiences continually pull the mind outward. A method of concentration
must be carefully devised that leads one to a meditative state and then finally
to the source and center of consciousness. The withdrawal of the senses is a
step forward in the path of meditation. Without it, the unknown part of life
cannot be revealed to the human being. One-half is already known, but only
the knowledge of the glorious missing half makes one’s knowledge complete
and perfect.

59. When this bodybearer desists from food, the senses and their
attractions turn away—all except for taste. But taste also ceases upon
seeing the supreme One.
60. Even though an intelligent man continues to endeavor, yet the
turbulent senses forcibly draw his mind away.
61. Therefore, controlling them all, joined in yoga, one should remain
intent upon Me. He whose senses are under control, his wisdom is
established.

It is the inherent nature of the senses to contact the external world. The
senses have tremendous power; only those who know the technique of
withdrawing the senses can realize how powerful they are. A little effort is
not sufficient to attain withdrawal of the senses. Aspirants often think that by
creating distance from the objects of the senses, by not enjoying the objects,
the senses can be controlled. But that is not true. Eating food is a sensory
experience, and if one does not eat food for some time, the desire to eat
becomes more intense and the mind imagines food in many forms. By
depriving the senses from experiencing their objects, the desire for enjoyment
can actually increase rather than decrease. By fasting one cannot get rid of the
vasana (desire) to eat. It is only when the aspirant realizes the Self and finds
delight in It that he becomes free from the temptations and attractions created
by the senses. But the aspirant cannot have knowledge of Atman as long as
the charms and temptations are in the mind.
If one follows the nature of the senses and does not understand that the
senses are the source of distraction, his mind will be completely dissipated.
The sadhaka must make constant effort; regular practice is important.
Patanjali, the codifier of yoga science, states in the Yoga Sutras (1:14) that
the sadhaka should practice for a long time without any break and with full
effort and profound faith. Otherwise sadhana will not be fruitful. Steadymindedness is possible only after one has controlled the senses.
These verses remind the sadhaka that he should not be disappointed by
the results of his sadhana if he fails once, twice, or even many times.
Constant effort will help him to attain his goal. When his wants and desires
are abandoned, then alone will he experience freedom.

62. As a person contemplates the objects of the senses, there arises in
him attachment to them; from attachment arises desire; from desire anger
is produced.
63. From anger comes delusion; from delusion, the confusion of memory
and loss of mindfulness; from the disappearance of memory and
mindfulness, the loss of the faculty of discrimination; by loss of the faculty

of discrimination, one perishes.
If one who constantly thinks of satisfying his desires for sensory
gratification finds any hindrance or opposition to the fulfillment of his
desires, he becomes frustrated. That frustration leads to anger toward that
which is frustrating him. Unfulfilled desire or dissatisfaction is thus the cause
of anger. When one becomes angry he forgets to use discrimination, and his
memory wavers. That leads to the loss of reason, and one’s mind becomes
completely imbalanced.
The downfall of a human being begins when he becomes preoccupied
with the objects of sensory gratification and the enjoyment of those objects.
Such a deluded person goes on collecting the objects of sense enjoyment. He
becomes dependent on those objects, and gratification becomes the goal of
his life, but his pursuit of pleasure creates self-degradation. Such a person is
called a hedonist. When for some reason the objects of sense gratification are
absent or not available, he becomes frustrated and angry.
If two such people seek the same pleasure and desire the same object,
they become enemies. For example, two great friends might kill each other if
they are strongly attracted to and fall in love with the same woman. But two
friends who are on the path of Self-realization and share the same goal
become even closer, because love for sensual objects is quite different from
love for Self-enlightenment. The first leads to selfishness and the latter to
selflessness. A selfish person is never able to conceive of the idea of
selflessness, which is the singular expression of universal love. When we
study the lives and sayings of great people, we find in them the quality of
selflessness, no matter what their religious or cultural background might be.
Ahimsa (noninjury) and selflessness are common characteristics of these
great people, whereas selfishness and violence are the symptoms of those
who do not remember the Self, who are preoccupied with and engrossed in
sense gratification.

64. Conducting oneself with the senses, towards the objects of the senses,

however, free of attraction and aversion, and under control of the Self, one
cultivating the Self attains a healthy and pleasant state of mind.
65. Upon attaining such pleasantness of mind, there is a diminution of
all sorrows. The intelligence of a person of such a pleased mind attends
quickly upon him.
Samyama (self-discipline) helps the sadhaka all the time. One who does
not believe in self-discipline cannot attain profound knowledge of the Self.
Sense gratifications are only momentarily pleasurable: the moment the
pleasurable object vanishes, the pleasure disappears as well. And when
pleasurable objects are absent, one experiences pain. Attachment to the
objects of the world is therefore the source of both pleasure and pain.
Tranquility is experienced by the mind that is free from desire for sense
gratification. The mind is ordinarily the slave of the senses that are employed
by it. But when the mind has control over the senses, it has the power to
discriminate right from wrong and that which is helpful from that which is
distracting. A steady, stable, and equable mind is a peaceful mind. And a
peaceful mind alone is free from grief.
The mind that is free from grief and sorrow and from distractions and
dissipations creates a forceful will. With the use of that will, one has
tremendous success in attaining his goal. A dissipated mind has no will, but a
concentrated and one-pointed mind creates will power. A student with a weak
and feeble will is not successful in his sadhana because of distractions, but
the student whose mind is concentrated and one-pointed has a firm and
determined will force that makes him courageous and fearless and able to
remove all sorts of obstacles and barriers.
Modern students are afraid of discipline. They fail to understand its
meaning and dismiss it. They have. the misconception that discipline is a sort
of punishment imposed on them by those in authority. Therefore the moment
they hear the word discipline, they leave. But without discipline, control of
the mind is impossible, and without control of the mind, one-pointedness is
not possible. Therefore there is no will power, no courage, no fearlessness,
for these qualities successively evolve from the practice of self-discipline.
Modern students have a desire to seek, but they constantly bathe in
material waters and find delight in the pleasures they experience there.
Preoccupied with sense gratification, their desire to know truth is never
fulfilled. They think of going in one direction, but all the while they are going

the other way. The sadhaka needs to understand that mind, action, and speech
should be directed toward one goal. A division should not be created by
having a desire to seek the truth while still pursuing the enjoyment of sense
gratification. The way one desires is the way one should think, and the way
one thinks is the way he should act. Otherwise a serious division is created
within.

66. There is no discriminating wisdom in one who is not joined in yoga,
nor is there any cultivating of contemplativeness for one who is not joined
in yoga. One who has not cultivated contemplation has no peace; how can
there be happiness for one who is not at peace?
67. The mind that is applied to following the wandering senses, indeed
such a mind plunders his wisdom as wind blows a boat in the water.
68. Therefore, O Mighty-armed One, he whose senses one and all are
held in control and held back from their objects, his wisdom is established.
Pure reason is the essential means to discriminate the truth from the nontruth, the eternal from the non-eternal. That discrimination helps one to
become non-attached to the objects of the world. When one resolutely
practices sadhana, he attains the power of non-attachment, and when one is
non-attached, he has full concentration. One who has full concentration
attains a one-pointed mind and can utilize all of his human resources. He is
able to experience peace, and peace brings happiness. That happiness is not
the same as the pleasure received from the objects of sense gratification.
Pleasure is a joy experienced through the senses, whereas happiness is an
outcome of the state of tranquility.
The human body is like a chariot in which the individual self is seated.
Human intelligence is the charioteer, and the mind is the reins. The senses are
the horses leading the chariot toward the objects of sensory enjoyment. The
wise man who is able to make his mind tranquil stands firm and leads the

chariot on the path to enlightenment, whereas the unwise lack the wisdom of
yoga and are unable to control the senses. Untrained horses are unreliable,
but trained horses lead the chariot on the path to enlightenment. Thus the
wise man learns to master the senses. He attains freedom, but he who is
unwise and uncontrolled is trapped by the snares of births and deaths.

69. That which is night to the ordinary human being is day to the wise,
and that in which the ordinary human being remains awake is night to the
wise one who sees.
This verse contains unique wisdom. The behavior of the sadhaka and
yogi is explained by saying that that which is night to the ordinary human
being is day to the wise, and that which is night to the wise is day to the
ignorant. The song of life of the sadhaka is well understood and assimilated
in this verse. The song of life is the eternal song, and the entire music of the
cosmos forms an orchestra that plays one and the same song with many
variations. The wise person is able to hear that song by making his whole
being an ear. That song is not heard by the ignorant one, for he is busy
listening to the gross, jarring, nerve-shattering, and disturbing sounds of
contemporary society.
The sadhakas who have experienced the higher dimensions of life, who
are able to have a glimpse of the Eternal, and who have touched the Infinite,
are awakened to truth. But others remain sleeping, unaware of truth. While
the ordinary man identifies himself with the worldly activities of the day, the
sage remains unaffected by the mundane happenings and finds his joy in
quiet hours late at night. Ordinary people do not know how to utilize the
calm, serene stillness of night, but the yogis enjoy this calmness in the
practice of samadhi. For them night drops the blossoms of their sadhana, and
they pick up those blossoms dropped by night. Such fortunate sadhakas are
blessed. Those rare ones sleep in the daytime and remain awake at night. For
ordinary and ignorant people, that is an impossibility. Those whose feet walk
in light have a peculiar but wonderful way of using the span of life that is not
understood by ordinary people. When everyone in the world remains
sleeping, sadhakas remain awake. And when the whole world is awake and

preoccupied with the pursuit of sensory pleasure and selfish ends, the
sadhaka sleeps. He remains unaffected and uninfluenced by the rush and roar
and distractions created by the day.
Sri Krishna hints at the differences in the thinking and behavior of these
two kinds of people: the enlightened ones, true seekers and sadhakas who are
constantly aware of the truth; and the ignorant who are totally unaware, who
chew the weed that grows in the water to quench their thirst rather than
drinking the water. The external allurements do contain pleasures, but they
have no capacity to quench the thirst. The thirst for happiness is the perennial
thirst of man. It is only quenched by the knowledge of the real Self.

70. As waters enter the ocean, which is totally full yet whose basin and
boundaries remain stable, he whom all the desires enter similarly attains
peace, and not one who desires the desires.
71. The person who wanders free of attachment, having abandoned all
desire, devoid of ego and of the concept of ‘mine,’ he attains peace.
72. This is the godly state, O Son of Pritha; attaining this, one is no
longer confused. Remaining in it even at the final hour, one finds
absorption into Brahman.
The aspirant who has attained calmness and serenity is like the infinite
sky in which storms. winds. and lightning may rage but which have no power
to disturb the serenity of the infinite. Similarly the storms of desires and
emotions pass through the mind but are not at all able to disturb the
tranquility of the realized yogi. Ironically enough, one who leads a pleasureoriented life is usually miserable, whereas the yogi who has perfect selfcontrol and has attained a state of calmness knows the joyous art of living

and being, which enables him to walk on this earth without being affected by
the so-called charms and temptations of the world. Sri Krishna teaches
Arjuna that this is the state of mind of one who has realized the Self. Such a
Self-realized human being is not subject to delusion, dejection, or
despondency. Even at the crucial hour he remains undisturbed, for he
identifies himself with his essential nature, Brahman, instead of identifying
himself with the ego and the objects of the world. The man who is free from
egocentric I-ness and my-ness performs his duties skillfully and joyfully.
Such an enlightened one develops an entirely different attitude toward
life, relationships, and objects. He does not identify with the objects of the
world and therefore lives in the midst of so-called possessions while
maintaining his aloofness. The ordinary man, however, is in the habit of
identifying himself with the objects of the world; he clings to his possessions
and develops an attachment for them. He is not certain that he will attain
what he desires and always remains afraid that he might lose what he
possesses. The fear of not gaining what he wants and the fear of losing what
he possesses makes him miserable. But the yogi who has attained the state of
equanimity, tranquility, and equilibrium knows that the objects of the world
should be used only as means, without a sense of attachment. They should
not be allowed to dissipate the mind. What is there to possess? Great ones are
great because they develop will power so that sense gratification and the
sense of possessing things completely lose their value. This attitude comes
after complete self-transformation. One then lives in the world discharging
his normal duties without being affected.
Such a man is always aware of the truth that he has come to this world
as a traveler on a long voyage. He is always like a guest in this world. Such a
traveling guest does not carry a burden on his back because the traveling
would then become a painful experience. He always remembers that life is
like a crowded bazaar, and he devises a method of traveling through that
bazaar without being hurt or hurting others. As a guest lives in someone’s
home without disturbing the members of the family, the traveler thinks, “I am
a guest here for a brief stay. Nothing belongs to me.” With that attitude there
are no chances of becoming attached to the things and relationships of the
world. For a true traveler the world is a base camp where he can compose and
gather his resources for the onward journey. Actually we are all travelers
through this world, so let us not become attached to it. As a mountaineer has
a base camp where he prepares himself to go to the summit, so is the case

with us and our stay in the world. Let us make our journey pleasant and
facilitative instead of becoming lost.
A sadhaka who has attained a state of equilibrium knows that death,
which is horrifying for the ordinary person, creates a wonderful melody like a
mother singing a lullaby to put her tired and weary baby into deep sleep. As a
short sleep gives rest to the tired baby who then awakens refreshed, death
gives rest to the worn, tired traveler who awakens reclothed in a new garb to
continue on his way. Death for a sage is merely a change. He assumes a new
garment and comes back to his path to continue his journey to the infinite.
Death has no power to deviate the attention of such a great man. He
maintains his consciousness of Brahman, here and hereafter.
Thus ends the second chapter, in which Sri Krishna awakens Arjuna
from his deep anguish. In this chapter the dialogue between Sri
Krishna and Arjuna encompasses the philosophy of Samkhya and the
practical method of yoga science.

Chapter Three
The Yoga of Action

Arjuna said
1. O Krishna, if you believe wisdom to be greater than action then why
are you urging me toward this terrible action?
2. With statements that seem mixed up, you are apparently confusing my
intellect; therefore, tell me one definitive thing whereby I may attain
beatitude.
In the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, Sri Krishna helped Arjuna
to sharpen his faculty of discrimination, judgment, and decisiveness and
made him aware of the pure Self within, which is timeless and beyond the
world of forms and names. He helped Arjuna understand that the Self is not
subject to change, death, or destruction, for the Self is timeless and eternal.
He also made Arjuna aware of the transitory nature of the world of objects.
No matter how much one tries to maintain outer conditions in a state of
steadiness, it is impossible to prevent them from changing.
Arjuna experienced grief because he had adopted the assumptions of
ordinary people. A person who is unaware of the eternal nature of the
Absolute and whose mind is undisciplined and disorderly lives in the midst of
confusion. Forgetting the truth that the nature of the Self is eternal and that

the nature of the temporal is changeable, such a person becomes infatuated
with objects and relationships and becomes attached to them. But with the
help of a teacher, one can develop a profound view of both the eternal and the
non-eternal. And with sadhana and discipline he can establish himself in his
essential nature, which is eternal Truth. He can then learn to perform his
duties in a non-attached way, which means doing duties selflessly, lovingly,
and skillfully. He realizes that absolute Truth is infinite and encompasses the
whole. Attaining that knowledge, he becomes fearless and goes beyond the
maya of delusion created by the confusion of the mind. Such a state of mind
leads one to the attainment of tranquility and equanimity.
Sri Krishna began by teaching Samkhya philosophy and psychology,
which distinguishes between the impermanence of the apparent reality and
the eternal nature of the ultimate Reality. He then explained the importance
of performing one’s duties, and finally he described that yoga in which the
development of buddhi appears to take precedence over action. It is natural at
this stage that Arjuna’s mind is confused, for he does not yet understand that
Sri Krishna is not presenting contradictory teachings but complementary
facets of the process of self-transformation. Arjuna’s confusion will gradually
be resolved as the dialogue progresses.
The knowledge of Samkhya philosophy imparted to Arjuna was not
sufficient for him to understand that his duty, fighting the war, could be
helpful for him as well as for the whole society. He has come out of his
serious state of mental depression, anxiety, and anguish and now he wants to
be completely free from doubt regarding the duties he has to perform. Arjuna
has gained knowledge from Sri Krishna, but he still does not know how to
apply that knowledge in his daily life. He also needs methods that will help
him discipline his mind and attain that summit which will give him the light
of direct knowledge and enable him to attain a state of equanimity.
There are major difficulties encountered by the aspirant at this stage: (1)
He has gained theoretical knowledge, but that knowledge is not yet fully
assimilated in his mind and heart; (2) Without a definite method of sadhana
and discipline of the senses, mind, and its modifications, he cannot direct his
energies inward and cannot have a one-pointed mind; (3) Lust for gaining the
pleasures of the world creates attachment, which is the source of misery; and
(4) Because of attachment, pure reason does not function. But when sadhana
and discipline are practiced, will power gives the aspirant the gift of inner
strength and self-reliance. Will power makes him determined to come out of

his old habits. He thereby becomes capable of understanding that nonattachment is true love. Non-attachment and attachment are the creations of
the higher and lower mind respectively. One is a state of identification with
truth, whereas the other is identification with the temporal.
In the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, buddhi yoga and karma
yoga were explained separately though they are actually one and the same.
Action or duty performed is visible, but the profound knowledge that helps
one perform skillful duties is inner action and is invisible. Long before the
action is performed outwardly, it is first performed subtly in the inner world.
The source of action in the inner world is the pure reason of buddhi. So
mastery of invisible action in the subtle world is called buddhi yoga, and
action that is skillfully performed in the external world is called karma yoga.
A seed in the palm of one’s hand has all the potential to bring forth flowers
and fruits, but when the seed is sown in the soil and emerges as a plant, then
alone does the full expression of the potential of the seed come to the visible
world. One is an invisible and unseen reality, the other a visible and seen
reality. Buddhi yoga and karma yoga are thus, two expressions of one and the
same existence.
These first two verses of the third chapter show that Arjuna does not
want to blindly follow the instructions of his teacher but wants to understand
Sri Krishna’s instructions before he practices and brings his inner experience
to full expression. Even after the aspirant resolves to follow his teacher, his
mind cannot comprehend the wisdom imparted because of his lack of direct
knowledge and practice. Arjuna’s queries are genuine and reflect the
problems shared by all students. One should learn to be like Arjuna, who
persists in putting questions before Sri Krishna rather than following without
understanding. Sri Krishna encourages Arjuna to express his doubt and
confusion so they can be dispelled. A real teacher never tires of answering
the questions of his beloved students. But most students either follow the
instructions of their teacher blindly without understanding them, or they just
try to understand the instructions intellectually but do not experiment with
them and practice to assimilate them correctly. Arjuna, however, is not
seeking mere intellectual clarification. His questions are intended to help him
resolve his doubts about his path so that he can practice with full conviction
and understanding. Having doubt is a valid state of mind, for before anything
is done a doubt arises: Shall I do it or not? Here Arjuna is like the mind, and
Sri Krishna is the perfect yogi and sage who with his pure reason helps the

mind to remove its doubt so that action can be performed. The part of mind
that doubts is manas; that which decides is called buddhi.

The Blessed Lord said
3. O Sinless One, in this world I have taught two kinds of discipline: the
yoga of knowledge for those whose path is of discriminating wisdom and
the yoga of action for the yogis.
4. A person does not attain the state of actionlessness simply by not
taking initiative in the matter of actions, nor does one attain perfection by
mere renunciation.
Verses 3 and 4 further explain the fine distinction between the path of
jnana yoga (the yoga of knowledge) and karma yoga (the yoga of action).
Verse 3 indicates that there are two means for attaining the highest state of
tranquility. Both are equally valid; neither one is superior. The word nishtha
means firm conviction or a well thought out and firm decision free from
doubt. A firm adherence to the path of knowledge is called jnana nishtha, and
a firm commitment to the path of action is called karma nishtha. The
followers of the path of knowledge have a firm conviction that one can attain
the highest state of liberation through knowledge alone. The followers of
karma yoga believe in performing their duties with non-attachment as a
means of self-unfoldment. In the path of jnana yoga, knowledge, nonattachment, and renunciation are the essential values. In the path of karma
yoga performing one’s duties skillfully, selflessly, and with non-attachment
are the prerequisites. It is interesting to note that the function of the five
senses in the human body is to gain knowledge, and the function of the five
organs (mouth, hands, feet, the organs of excretion and of procreation) is to
help one to do his duties through action. These two sets of organs

complement one another in the maintenance of human existence. It is also
interesting that Carl Jung, the modern psychologist, classified people into two
categories: those with an introverted nature and those with an extroverted
nature. Those who look inward and try to understand the internal states are
more inclined to follow the path of jnana yoga. Those who are extroverted
and committed to do their actions are called karma yogis.
The path of jnana yoga involves far more than renunciation.
Traditionally it is based on four means: discrimination, non-attachment, a
keen longing for liberation, and the six-fold virtues (control of the mind and
senses, endurance, turning away from worldly objects, faith, and tranquility).
These qualities are explained in subsequent verses. Verse 4 states that one
cannot attain perfection by mere renunciation. Suppose an aspirant suddenly
decides to follow the path of renunciation but makes his decision impulsively
rather than through real wisdom. He renounces his home and all that he owns,
for renunciation to most people means creating a physical distance between a
person and his objects. But until one has attained the state of non-attachment,
he continues to remember his past and to long for all that he has left behind.
In such a situation true renunciation is not accomplished, and the real
knowledge that helps in the path of liberation is absent. If one is not able to
create the fire of non-attachment in his renunciation of externals, he is not
able to dispel the darkness of ignorance. Non-attachment and renunciation go
hand in hand. In the path of action non-attachment is also important, and
there it is related to the fruits of the actions rather than to the actions
themselves. Some commentators translate the word vairagya as indifference
rather than as non-attachment, but that translation does not convey the true
meaning of the word. Non-attachment is love for duty and not indifference or
disinterest. One does not attain freedom by not doing his duty.
Non-attachment is the highest virtue; it gives freedom both to one who
prefers to perform his duty and yet remain unaffected by worldly turmoils
and to one who thinks that duties are self-imposed and believes renunciation
to be superior to the path of action. Non-attachment is a virtue that helps in
both paths. Actually a renunciate also performs his duties with full sincerity
in order to attain his goal of final emancipation. In the path of action one
performs his actions skillfully and selflessly by remaining non-attached and
thereby attaining final emancipation.
Although the paths of action and renunciation are different, the aim of
both is one and the same. In the life of a renunciate there seems to be a tyaga,

a literal separation of oneself from the objects of desire. The renunciate
renounces all objects. His sole desire is to attain the state of freedom, and he
has a duty to maintain one single desire: to be one with the Absolute. His
wheel of life still rotates but without bearing fruits. In the path of
renunciation tyaga and non-attachment are two essentials. In the path of
action, however, there is no tyaga, but one learns to perform his duty in the
midst of all objects and relationships and to renounce the fruits. The path of
action is a path of conquest and love. The path of renunciation is a path of
sacrifice.
In the path of action one offers the fruits of his actions to others. He
acknowledges the Absolute in everyone. That is prayer and worship in reality
and not a prayer of empty words. If one prays but never realizes the profound
meaning of the prayer by practicing it in his daily life, he will not find inner
satisfaction. Without inner satisfaction one remains anxious.

5. No one can remain without performing actions even for a moment.
Every creature is helplessly made to perform action by the gunas born of
nature.
All living beings have to perform actions. As long as one breathes, he
performs actions, even if he does not want to. Even sitting still and sleeping
are actions. Since one has to perform actions, he should learn to do them in
the best possible way. The human being is responsible for all his actions and
the fruits (rewards) obtained by those actions. If one resists his duties, he
creates conflict and strife both for himself and others, whereas if he learns to
act graciously he creates harmony and joy within and without. Resistance can
be positive in many circumstances. For example, if one is asked to do
something that is against his conscience, resistance is a force that helps him
to follow his inner promptings. But resisting one’s duties makes misery out of
the inevitable. Sattva, rajas, and tamas are three qualities of the human mind
that bind the individual and motivate him to act. They will be explained in
depth later.

6. One of deluded psyche who, controlling the senses of action, continues
to remember with the mind the objects of the senses is said to be a
hypocrite.
There is considerable confusion about the path of renunciation. Many
so-called renunciates are hypocrites; outwardly they appear to be austere and
to avoid contact with the objects that lead to attachment, but their minds
remain thinking of the pleasures of the world. That sort of austerity is false
and dishonest. Such hypocrites remain deluded, and such austerities never
bear fruit. That sort of behavior weakens the human endeavor and does an
injustice to oneself. If one continues to live in that way, he creates guilt in his
mind. He neither has peace of mind nor is he able to perform his actions with
full attention and skill. A hypocritical person is concerned with outward
expression and with following the letter of the law, whereas one who is
genuine is more interested in his inner experience than in appearance.
The distinction between an outer show and inner experience is an
important one. The former has no positive value and may even be detrimental
to one’s growth if it is not a reflection of his inner state of being. It is all too
easy for one to make an outer pretense of sincerity and to enjoy praise and
accolades though his thoughts and feelings are completely contrary. Jesus
taught that one should pray in secret and not as the hypocrites do. If one
refrains from making a public show of his sincere inner experiences, those
experiences are less likely to be contaminated by egotistical gratification.
External renunciation (tyaga) is a step on the path to Self-realization, but
if one does not attain inner renunciation (vairagya) he creates many serious
problems for himself. Such a person cannot live as a genuine renunciate. As a
result of intense emotion, thousands of people spontaneously decided to
follow Buddha and to become renunciates. But they soon found that their
worldly desires remained with them. They were afraid that the world would
not accept them back, so they corrupted the path of renunciation, indulging in
the fulfillment of sensory pleasures while still claiming to be renunciates.
That has happened in the spiritual traditions of the West as well.
The hypocrisy of some does not invalidate renunciation, the rare path of
the fortunate few, for hypocrites are not renunciates. They may dress like

renunciates, but their minds still go to the grooves of their old habit patterns.
They are not truthful to themselves so they are not truthful to others. Real
renunciates are the most courageous of people. They belong to the heavens
though they live on the earth.
Hypocritical behavior is an outward expression of a cleavage within the
personality. There is a split between one’s innermost feelings and thoughts
and his outer expressions. The hypocritical person is afraid that others will
not accept him as he is, so he uses a false mask so that others will respect
him. Then out of fear of condemnation he goes on building a false front. He
condemns himself because he is guilty, and he is afraid that others will
discover him. A hypocritical person does not allow anyone to know him as he
thinks and feels inside, and he may not even know himself. It is likely that he
keeps his innermost feelings secret even from himself and consciously
identifies with his insincere behavior. If his sincerity is challenged, such a
person will bring all his defenses to bear; he will deny, attack, and feel selfrighteous. This type of person always remains unknown and a stranger to
himself and has nothing to contribute to society, for if one does not even
admit to himself his inner thoughts and feelings, how can he possibly explore
deeper dimensions and find that inner Self of all? In the process of selfdiscovery one must uncover, examine, and gain mastery over each stratum of
his existence. And the first stratum to be faced is that of the unacceptable
qualities that lie hidden behind the facade one presents to the world. Only by
fully acknowledging those qualities can one take them in hand and transform
himself.
Modern psychologists have noted that a duplicitous way of being is the
hallmark of the neurotic. Some have gone so far as to assert that duplicity is
the very basis of neurosis, and that when one’s inner feeling and thoughts
become one with his outer expression, the neurosis and interpersonal
melodramas cease. Such therapists focus on helping one to express himself in
a straightforward way. When that is accomplished the considerable energy
that is invested in keeping one’s inner feelings and thoughts hidden from
oneself and from the world is freed up. One then becomes energetic and
dynamic.

7. He, however, who, controlling the senses with the mind, O Arjuna,
initiates the yoga of action with the senses of action, he, unattached, is
distinguished.
8. Do perform the assigned action; action is greater than inaction. Even
the journey of your body cannot be successful if you are inactive.
9. This world is the cause of the bondage of karma, except for actions
performed for the purpose of sacrifice. Therefore, O Son of Kunti, perform
actions for the sake of sacrifice and conduct yourself as free of attachment.
Sri Krishna shows Arjuna that his thought of renunciation is
hypocritical, for it comes from confusion and despondency born of
attachment. True renunciation, however, is based on non-attachment. It is
also important to perform actions with a completely non-attached mind. That
is far superior to not doing action or being afraid to act. One who has
practiced with sincerity and honesty by applying full human efforts can attain
the wisdom of non-attachment. Thus he is able to control his senses and
perform his duties.
A human being cannot exist on this earth without doing actions. There
are three kinds of action that we perform in daily life. Actions such as eating,
brushing our teeth, and bathing are helpful to ourselves only; they are not
helpful to others. Such actions are essential, and when we regulate our habits
and properly perform these self-oriented actions, we maintain our health.
There is another kind of action, which we perform for ourselves and others in
the context of our relationships, that is performed on the basis of coexistence.
Sharing in cooking and shopping are examples of that type of action. But
there is a higher kind of action that leads one to liberation. In that action all
the fruits are surrendered and offered to others.
Verse 8 can be understood in two ways. The first meaning is that one

should do those actions that have been decided by the coordinator of all the
faculties of mind with full determination, self-confidence, self-control, nonattachment, and will power. That is the highest of all actions, and it will be
described in depth later. The other meaning of the verse is that one should
perform his duty according to his nature. The three gunas (qualities of nature)
motivate the human being to perform actions. Actions performed as the
outcome of one’s own primitive nature are definitely inferior to the actions
performed by self-determined will.
The message of the Bhagavad Gita is that one should create a sense of
responsibility toward his own duty. And he should study his own abilities and
potentials to help him understand and skillfully perform his duty. When we
analyze the abilities of the masses, we find out that there are four categories
of people in the world. The first category, those who are mentally brilliant
and have profound control over their senses and minds, should devote more
time to unfolding their awareness and should use their brilliance to serve
society. Their dharma (duty) is to serve others through their brilliance and
intelligence, to teach and impart knowledge. The second category, those who
are less inclined toward the path of jnana but are physically strong, should
learn to use their physical powers in performing their duties. Third is that
category of people who have practical knowledge for living in the world.
They can earn and gain and at the same time share their earnings with others
generously. Fourth are those who can attend to the needs of others and
perform services for others and thus make their livelihood.
These four categories were established for the welfare of society and for
the distribution of labor. With the passage of time, that division became the
caste system, the greatest of all curses in Indian society. In ancient times that
division was accepted for the successful integration of society, so that society
as a whole did its dharma for the well-being of all. As time passed selfish
leaders and priests rigidified those divisions and thus created a great gulf in
the social order. They sought to fulfill their own selfish ends by converting
the division of labor into the caste system. That enabled them to use and
control others.
In the modern world child psychologists and counselors in schools and
colleges study and analyze the student’s behavior, intelligence, and
predominant habit patterns in order to help him select the subjects that will be
most helpful to him. It is important for teachers and counselors to make
students aware of their abilities and potentials, for if one is forced to study

subjects that are contrary to his abilities and interests, he will not be
successful. Despite the availability of counseling in schools as well as
aptitude and personality tests, most young people today remain confused
about the direction their lives should take. Their problem is perhaps the exact
opposite of those caught in a caste system. Free to follow their whims, they
often pursue that which excites their fancy at the time and then lose interest
and jump to something else. Such experimentation has its value, but it is
more helpful if it is guided by an attempt to understand one’s propensities,
inclinations, and inherent skills and assets as well as one’s weaknesses. In
these verses the idea of acting according to one’s nature refers to
potentialities, not to the rigid and useless caste system. One should direct his
life so that he can use his assets and work with his weak areas, turning them
into strengths as well.
Arjuna, physically healthy, strong, and trained in the art of war, talks of
following the path of renunciation and forgets his duty. He is not able to
understand his dharma but wants to follow the dharma of others. In such a
case calamity ensues. Sri Krishna, a great yogi, already knows Arjuna’s
potentials and thus recommends the path of action, and not the path of
renunciation. After one understands his nature and the course of action he
should follow, he has still to understand the way to perform his duties. Sri
Krishna teaches Arjuna that the highest of all deeds are those performed with
non-attachment, those in which the rewards of the actions are offered as
sacrifice.
Many a stupid and ignorant person misunderstands sacrifice and applies
it in a very distorted and shameful manner: killing and offering a goat, lamb,
or other animal to please his god. Butchering animals is a shameful act, but
there are many remote corners of the world where people still practice animal
sacrifice as a part of worship. There is no logic that can prove that such a
sacrifice will please God. How can He who is the law of love and equality be
pleased by such rituals? Correctly understood, the word “sacrifice” means to
give away even one’s rights for the sake of others, willingly and happily. If
one can give the best that he has and willingly offer it to the service of others,
that is called sacrifice.

10. In the beginning the Progenitor, having created the beings, together
with sacrifice, exhorted them: Multiply by this sacrifice. May this be the
bearer of the fulfillment of desires for you.
11. Cultivate the gods by this, and may those gods nurture you.
Nurturing each other, you both will attain the highest beatitude.
12. The gods, cultivated by sacrifice, will provide for you the desired
pleasures. He who enjoys these pleasures given by them without offering
them in return is merely a thief.
Sri Krishna describes the various ways of performing one’s duties. He
says that duties performed for the purpose of sacrifice do not create bondage,
but duties performed selfishly bind the human being to the results of his
actions. Giving up attachment and performing one’s actions as a sacrifice is
the message given in these verses. The term yajna (worship or rite) is not
used here in the limited sense of offering oblations. Many kinds of yajna
described in the scriptures are performed by householders for various
purposes. Some people offer oblations, some do austerities, and some think
that studying scriptures in a ritualistic way is also yajna. The control of the
senses is also a kind of yajna. Practicing the yoga of non-attachment through
the control of senses and mind and sacrificing all the fruits of actions is called
anasakti yoga. Actually human life itself is a yajna. All action performed
from morning until evening—eating, drinking, talking, walking, and sleeping
—are yajna, though few people are aware of that. The word yajna, which
comes from the root “yaj,” refers to three types of action: the worship of
gods; giving away gifts; and becoming free from fear by controlling the mind
and senses, studying the scriptures, and establishing truth, peace, and
compassion for all beings. Each of the three types of yajna is performed with
the goal of sacrifice, giving up the fruits that are received from such practices
rather than retaining them for one’s own use. Actions that involve reverence

and bring various elements of society together are also called yajna. Yajna
can also be categorized according to whether it is performed externally or
internally. Ordinary people offer material oblations, but in internal yajna,
only those austerities are performed that are helpful in the control of the
senses and mind.
When one has performed yajna, the fruits he reaps therein should be
offered to others. Such a yajna is the highest of all duties. The action that is
selflessly done to help the poor and needy is another beneficial form of yajna.
When one learns to give selflessly of the fruits of his actions for the benefit of
others, he is free from the bondage created by the fruits of his actions. Such a
sacrifice is revered in society and at the same time gives happiness and
freedom to those who perform yajna. All truly great people have sacrificed
their lives for the service of humanity. Sacrifice is a noble quality of the
human being and one of the expressions of a virtuous life. Sri Krishna
teaches Arjuna the importance of yajna, that it is a duty and that it should be
performed selflessly, not for selfish ends.
Householders perform yajna, for it is important for them to do such duty
regularly in order to attain perfection in the world. Selfless service performed
by householders is called yajna, but in the case of a renunciate the term yajna
is not used in the same way that it is accepted in the external world, for the
renunciate has no worldly duties to perform. Whatever duties he does
perform are called antar yajna (inner yajna). He learns to light the fire of
knowledge and burns all his samskaras in that fire, which is symbolized by
his ochre robes, ochre being the color of fire. When an aspirant decides to
renounce all his personal interests for the sake of attaining the absolute Truth
and is determined to follow the path of knowledge, he performs the last rite
of yajna by sacrificing all his personal desires. He then attains freedom and is
able to tread the path of renunciation.
Verses 11 and 12 refer to the devas or gods. The ignorant think that gods
dwell in celestial worlds and have power to control human destiny. Such gods
are merely projections of one’s internal organization; the creation of gods in
the external world is a projection of the unconscious. The belief in gods was
created to help those who are not aware of their internal resources and are in
need of an objectification of supernatural powers. They need to believe in
gods that will help them fulfill desires that they feel inadequate to fulfill
through their own means. It is said that those who have seen gods are fools,
for they have seen something of their own self and mistakenly believe that

they have seen gods. Externalists have created gods for their own
convenience, but in actuality those gods are symbols of unknown phenomena
that occur within.
For those aspirants who cannot contemplate on the attributeless Eternal,
symbols are recommended by spiritual teachers. In the path of meditation
certain symbols are used to make the mind one-pointed. The student is then
advised to go beyond the symbol to comprehend its meaning rather than
remaining dependent on the symbol forever. Thus in meditation one leaves
the symbol behind and goes forward.
The ignorant worship the symbols without knowing and understanding
that which lives behind and beyond the symbol. But if one is capable of
exploring that which is being expressed by the symbol, he may eventually
discover the existence of the formless archetype that is clothed in the form of
the symbol. With further work he may attain direct experience of the
archetypes, not as objects but by becoming one with the archetypes
themselves.

13. Those who eat only the remainder of the sacrifice are freed from all
sins. Those sinful ones who cook only for the sake of themselves eat only
sin.
Sacrifice is an inborn quality. It is the quality of giving freely without
any expectation. Self-preservation is also an innate quality, not of human
beings alone, but of all creatures. Whether one chooses to devote his life to
sacrifice or to self-preservation depends on his environment and his training.
Those with whom one grew up and with whom he currently spends his time
influence him and promote the development of either self-preservation or
giving.
For example, in Aryan culture whenever food is prepared the guest is
served first, and other members of the family eat the leftover food. That is
one step in learning to give and to love others, which finally leads one to
complete selflessness, the singular expression of pure love. In contrast to that,
modern society leads one to become insecure. The insecure person looks out
for his own needs first; he takes the best for himself.

Western culture and psychology consider the ego to be the center of
consciousness, but the perennial psychology of the East disagrees. It regards
buddhi, pure reason, as one aspect of the internal state called antahkarana
chatustaya and ego as another. In the West all the activities of the human
being are directed toward strengthening the ego. Such a perspective cannot
ever incorporate the idea of sacrifice, learning to give the best one has
selflessly. We encountered the same problem in explaining the concept of
non-attachment, which also is not understood by Western culture. Because
the West believes the ego to be the center of knowledge, the idea of sacrifice
is frightening, for the ego is insecure and does not want to give up anything it
possesses. One thinks that if he sacrifices, he will not have enough for
himself. He thinks that sacrifice is a loss because he is attached to and
identified with that which would be given in sacrifice. Thus he is afraid of
sacrifice. Actually what one loses in sacrifice is attachment and fear. If one is
not attached to the object, there is no loss in sacrifice. The egocentric person
believes that sacrifice means being consumed or even dying, but in fact it is
only one’s egocentric perspective that dies in sacrifice. The ocean is not used
up in giving off moisture through evaporation, and the resources of a human
being are not used up in sacrificing. Actually the more one sacrifices, the
more one has. In sacrificing one gives up that to which he has been holding
on, and he is then open to receive. As long as one is holding on, he is closed
off to receiving the sacrifice of the universe. So what the egoistic person
considers to be a death is life itself from another perspective. Thus we say
sacrifice is life. In the East sacrifice is a virtue not at all related to a sense of
self-depletion or having to give something under duress. The East considers
the greatest of all human beings to be those who sacrifice their selfish
pleasures for the sake of selfless service and the attainment of eternal
wisdom.
The giving human being sacrifices his best for his beloved, but the
selfish person uses all his so-called loved ones for the sake of his selfish
pleasures. Those who are not aware of the law of expansion do not
experience the joy of sacrificing and giving. But those who have practiced to
strengthen the quality of giving cannot stop giving, for giving fills one with
the highest of joys, whereas expecting and taking only lead to momentary
pleasure that later results in disgust, disappointment, and a sorrowful state of
mind. Those who do not learn to give or sacrifice the fruits of their actions do
not know the art of living and being.

The essence of sacrifice is giving selflessly. It is a complete expression
of love in the true sense. Those who learn to be content with only their
essential needs fulfilled are truly happy, and they use all their resources in the
love and service of others. The little bit that is left over is used for the
sustenance of their existence in the world so that they can continue giving.
Such individuals live for others. But the selfish are not aware of the law of
giving and are doomed.

14. Beings are born from food; food is produced through the rain god;
rain is produced through sacrifice, and sacrifice arises from action.
15. Know action to arise from the Vedas and the Vedas to be produced
from the indestructible syllable. Therefore, all-pervading knowledge of the
Vedas is ever established in sacrifice.
In the universe every action is a ritual, and the ritual is performed for the
sake of sacrifice. The raindrop sacrifices itself to become part of the plant,
and the sun gives up its energy to give light and life to all beings. The rain
that nourished the plants, herbs, and all sorts of food for human beings is a
free gift from Providence. That free gift is called sacrifice. The governing
center of the universe itself is full of sacrifice: its nature is to give. This very
universe is its gift, and it goes on giving freely of itself to the universe.
Food helps to sustain the body, which is an essential instrument for
performing action. The gross body is made out of food that gives vital
energy, so without food life is impossible. All the various species of creatures
propagated in the world live on food, for food creates and maintains their
bodies. Rain is essential to the growth of food, and therefore food is born
from rain. The wise know that the showers of rain are the showers of
blessings received by the earth. The term “rain god” used here does not mean
that rain should be worshipped as a god but taken as a link to that which
nourishes and sustains the whole universe. For without rain, food cannot be
grown, and without food, the body cannot be maintained. “Rain is produced
through sacrifice” means the love of the Eternal flows freely and helps the

herbs, trees, plants, and food to grow. That love is called sacrifice.
People sometimes interpret this verse to mean that we should sacrifice to
the “rain god,” but in actuality it should be understood in the other direction.
Rain itself is a sacrifice of the Eternal. This verse teaches us that the human
being is born out of selfless love, sacrifice. Thus if one wants to live in
harmony with the law of the universe, he should learn to lead his life by
loving all selflessly.

16. He who does not revolve according to the wheel which is thus set into
motion, O Son of Pritha, lives in vain, his entire life span sinful, libidinous
through his senses.
The wheel of life, rotates only on the basis of sacrifice; it cannot go
forward without it. That process can be understood as an expression of the
cosmic will. Every individual is gifted by Providence to do selfless actions
and to remain non-attached by constantly maintaining awareness of the real
Self. Those who are slaves of the sense organs and just live to enjoy sensory
pleasure create obstacles for themselves. They are not fulfilling the purpose
of life. Thus they suffer as a result of their own follies.

17. The child of Manu who delights in the Self alone and has satiety in
the Self, satisfied in the Self alone, for him there is no action left yet to be
performed.
18. He has no purpose with the actions already performed nor with those
not yet performed. He has no dependence for any purpose on any beings at
all.
19. Therefore, perform your dutiful action incessantly without

attachment. The person who performs actions without attachment attains
the Supreme.
One who has realized the Self always takes delight in the Self and is
content, for he has accomplished the purpose of life. Therefore nothing
remains to be done. He has no selfish interest in performing any action, and
he has no selfish motivation in not performing any action. Those who have
trained themselves in the art of performing their duties without attachment or
selfishness are neither interested in involving themselves with further action
nor with non-action. For such great ones there is no bondage of any sort.
Whether one lives in the world or away from the world as a renunciate is
immaterial. That which is important is attaining a state of tranquility and
remaining non-attached all the time. The teachings in these verses elevate
Arjuna so that he is able to perform his duties with an equable mind and
remain non-attached.
A human being cannot possibly live without doing actions, and when he
performs actions he reaps the fruits of those actions. The reaping of the fruits
involves him and leads him to go on doing further actions and reaping the
fruits again and again. Then he finds himself caught in the bondage of karma.
What is the way of attaining freedom from that cycle? The way of freedom is
not attained by not doing actions or by continuing to do actions but by
surrendering the fruits of one’s actions to others. Karma (action) never binds.
It is the fruits of the karma and the desire to reap the fruits that create
bondage. The message of the Bhagavad Gita is that one should learn to do his
duties lovingly, skillfully, and selflessly by being completely non-attached.
Only then will he be free from the bondage of action.
The motivation that prompts one to do action is important. For example,
suppose someone does charity. What is his motive? Some people do charity
for the sake of name and fame so that others will think they are great, and
some do charity motivated by the primitive notion that they will be rewarded
after death. Conscientious and wise people, however, do charity because they
know that freedom can be attained by giving up the fruits of one’s actions, for
it is the fruits that are responsible for motivating one to do further actions. In
these examples similar actions are performed, but they arise from three
different motivations. The motivation to do selfless actions helps one to attain
a state of tranquility. Finally one attains the state of perfection in which he
has nothing to do, for he has already accomplished the noble purpose of his

life.

20. Janaka and others reached total accomplishment through action
alone. Even looking at the needs of gathering worldly success, you ought to
act.
There were many scholars in ancient times who tried to prove that the
path of renunciation is higher than the path of action. Some scholars,
however, say that the path of action is higher than renunciation. Such
generalizations are inadequate, for it all depends on one’s capacities and
inclinations. What is crucial in either path is doing one’s duty. Sri Krishna
explains that there have been great ones in the past who attained perfection
by doing their duties. He teaches Arjuna that one cannot attain perfection
without doing his duty.
One should analyze his inner abilities so that he can understand his duty.
It is the duty of those on the path of renunciation to follow that path and
attain perfection. But the majority of people in the world follow the path of
action. By following the path of action, one can also attain perfection. Sri
Krishna says, “Arjuna, being a warrior you have to perform your dharma. By
abandoning your dharma, you can never become perfect. Therefore do not
escape but fight with all your might and with a one-pointed mind, remaining
non-attached and maintaining the state of equilibrium in the midst of the
battle of life.”
Sri Krishna asks Arjuna to do his duty rather than escaping into sloth
and inertia. Doing one’s duty is dharma. Dharma means to unify different
elements of society. If the leaders and wise men of society abandon their
duties and follow the path of inaction or renunciation, they will create serious
disturbances and disintegration of the society. Janaka was a sage and king
who is always cited as an example of one who had the wisdom to discharge
his duties skillfully while remaining in a state of equilibrium and nonattachment.

21. In whatever way the senior-most one conducts himself, that very way
the other people follow. Whatever authority he establishes, the world
conducts itself accordingly.
22. O Son of Pritha, in all the three worlds I have nothing that is yet to
be done, nothing not attained or yet to be attained; yet I, indeed, continue
in action.
23. If I were perchance not to continue in action without lassitude, O
Son of Pritha, and since all human beings follow my path in every way,
24. All these worlds would perish if I were not to perform action; I would
be the cause of disorder and would kill all these beings.
In all great cultures of the world, there has always been the noble
tradition of following in the footsteps of the great ones. They are accepted as
great because of their selflessness and the sacrifices they made for the people
who came in touch with them. Thus they became examples and ideals for
ordinary people. A great man is known by certain signs and symptoms that
are not found in ordinary people. Ordinary people are selfish; great men are
selfless. The minds of ordinary people are uncontrolled and disturbed,
whereas the minds of great men are controlled and tranquil. Ordinary people
cannot visualize future events, but great men can have such vision.
There are two kinds of great people that we hold up as ideals. First there
are the fortunate ones who completely devote their lives to prayer and
meditation. Then there are those who know how to live in the world, doing
their duties selflessly and offering the fruits of their actions to others. Both
are worthy of our reverence. The action, speech, and behavior of the great

ones are observed by ordinary people who then follow such great people
without any doubts. If by chance the conduct of a great man is no longer
exemplary, there is the chance for such conduct to be magnified by the
masses in a horrible and exaggerated way. Those who follow the path of
selfless service therefore remain austere so that their image is not distorted
and thus does not lead others to disappointment and disgust.
Ordinary people have in their hearts and minds an image of what a great
man should be like. If the person who is idealized as a hero, leader, or great
man does not live according to the image projected onto him by the masses,
the revered symbol that they have created for the great man is also destroyed.
Sometimes it is the fault of the idealized person, but many times it is due to
the false expectations of his following. For instance, before a student comes
to meet a spiritual teacher for the first time, he has already formed ideas and
impressions about what a teacher should be like. When he goes to the teacher,
it disappoints him if the teacher does not talk, sit, and behave the way he
expects. He then searches for another teacher that will meet his ideal, but he
is not successful in that endeavor, for the student has created an image within
and expects the teacher to live according to the projection of his own inner
ideal. A similar process occurs between a patient and his psychotherapist.
The distortions projected onto the therapist are called transference.* Teachers
also have certain expectations: they want to meet the perfect student. Both
teachers and students become disappointed with each other’s actual behavior,
but when they keep their minds open and free from preconceived ideas they
can accept each other as they are.
It is important to distinguish between the image that the student projects
onto the teacher and the qualities that are prerequisites of a good teacher. A
student should not accept a teacher unless he has the following qualities: (1)
A teacher should be selfless. (2) All his expressions should be loving, and
there should not be greed of any sort from the teacher’s side. (3) A teacher
should not use his students to serve him in any way, for that makes the
teacher dependent on his students. One who is dependent on someone else’s
resources is not a genuine teacher and should not be followed. (4) A real
teacher is never tired of teaching his students. He teaches in many ways—
through his speech, writings, and actions, and at a later stage through silence.
If those signs and symptoms are missing in the teacher, one should not waste
his time and energy following him. Instead of learning and listening to the
teacher’s instructions, many students foolishly start adoring and worshipping

him as though he were a god. Such teachers and students destroy the noble
heritage of the teacher-disciple relationship and create confusion for the real
seekers and teachers.
Analyzing and studying symbols is one of the profound ways of
knowing the qualities of great men. In ancient times there were no printing
presses, tape recorders, or writing paper. Therefore the ancients left certain
symbols for future generations so that they could understand the way the
ancients lived. For example, if the pictorial symbol of Ganapati, the elephant
god, is properly understood and analyzed, it becomes clear that the ancients
described the ideal qualities of a leader through that symbol. The head of an
elephant symbolizes that a great leader should not be violent, for elephants
are very calm. They do not live on the flesh of other beings; elephants are
vegetarians, and they are both healthy and intelligent. Using an elephant as an
example dispels the notion that it is necessary to eat meat in order to maintain
health and vigor. Ganapati has a big belly, which means the leaders should be
able to accept all sorts of suggestions from various quarters for the sake of
doing justice and selfless service to society. Ganapati is shown with a mouse,
meaning that leaders should have counselors like mice who, with the help of
their sharp teeth, can cut the net of entanglements and conspiracy that tend to
develop around leaders. There are many other aspects of this symbol,
Ganapati, that one can learn from, but today instead of understanding the
symbolism, many people worship the symbol without knowing its meaning.
There are many other symbols, such as the cross, the star of David, and the
lotus that are adored and worshipped without knowing their meanings. That
is a serious error. The method of understanding such symbolism is a
knowledge in itself, like the method of studying dream symbols. It should be
studied if one is to understand the world within and without.
Sri Krishna instructs Arjuna to live up to the estimation of a great man,
for he is a leader and warrior, and if he fails in doing his duties the ordinary
people will follow his example, and the entire organization of the society will
become disintegrated, degenerated, and disturbed. The way great people
behave is the very way ordinary people try to behave. The standards laid
down by the great men become ideals for laymen to follow. The great ones
actually have nothing to do—no action or duty whatsoever. They perform
actions only in the service of humanity; they have no selfish motivation.
Sri Krishna declares that in all three worlds there is nothing for him to
do. What are those three worlds? The world that is known by the ordinary

person is a reality created by the senses and mind when one is in the waking
state. In the dreaming state that reality is completely changed, and in the
sleeping state it vanishes. The mind functions differently in each of these
three states and has different experiences in each. These three states of mind
are like three distinct realities. The mind functions even in deep sleep, and
that subtle functioning of the mind is beyond the realm of the waking and
dreaming states. When the mind is trained to go beyond the spheres of these
three states, it experiences a state beyond called turiya, which can be termed
sleepless sleep, a fully awakened state from which one can have a profound
and comprehensive knowledge of the waking, dreaming, and sleeping
realities. A great one who has attained the state beyond has nothing left to be
done in any of the three worlds experienced in the waking, dreaming, and
sleeping states. Sri Krishna is a traveler through the three worlds, having his
permanent abode in the fourth, where both actions and the fruits received
therein lose their value and meaning. One is not motivated to do duties or
actions when he has already accomplished the purpose of his life, for the
desire that motivates him to actions is absent in the state beyond. Here cause
and effect, which are inseparably mingled, remain completely absent, for
motivation and desire are already fulfilled. Their values and influences are
reduced to zero; therefore no duty whatsoever remains to be performed. Sri
Krishna is leading Arjuna to fathom all three levels of consciousness—
waking, dreaming, and sleeping—and finally to attain the state of tranquility
so that he can have a clear and comprehensive view of all three realities.
When consciousness is trapped by the deluded mind, the vision is
obscured. Partial vision creates further confusion. The confused mind loses
its power and does not have awareness of the other dimensions of life. Arjuna
is aware of only one state of mind. Influenced by the dramas taking place in
the waking state, he does not have profound knowledge of the whole. Sri
Krishna, the lord and master of all the states of consciousness, advises, “Rise
and go higher and higher and finally attain the state of tranquility.”
After the three worlds are explained, one wonders why a fully realized
person, having perfect tranquility and being completely non-attached, wants
to perform action. That question is answered in Verse 24. All social
institutions function because of the particular order established by the leaders.
If the leaders do not perform actions to help the masses, the entire society
will be disintegrated and destroyed. Many great civilizations have vanished
from the earth because the leaders failed to perform their duties. According to

the times and the needs of society, great men have come to guide the masses.
Though the great men are free from motivations that prompt them to do their
duties, they walk on earth with us exactly like ordinary human beings, but
with extraordinary skill in performing actions to lead, help, and educate the
masses. It is not because they have a need to do that but because of their love
for others. Sri Krishna is implicitly saying, “Oh, Arjuna, you are also a great
leader, and if you abandon your duty, that will lead to the destruction of your
people. At this critical juncture do not shy away, but fight the battle.”
There are three categories of great people. There are those who are great
by birth, for they have already accomplished all they ought to have
accomplished in their previous births. They come to this world with the
desire to serve, love, and give. The second group of great people makes
serious efforts to attain greatness. In their human effort and endeavor they
sometimes slip, yet they are great compared to ordinary people. The third
category of great people is composed of those who are made great by
publicity and propaganda. That form of greatness misleads the masses and
destroys their human endeavor. Unfortunately in a country like ours every
year there comes a “bhagavan,” “guru,” or self-proclaimed “avatara” who
gains notoriety though he actually has none of the qualities of a truly great
man. Such “bhagavans” mislead others and become a curse to the innocent
students who follow them blindly. Arjuna belongs in the second category. Sri
Krishna instructs Arjuna to do his duty, for he is a leader, and his behavior
will be observed and followed by the masses.

25. O Descendant of Bharata, whatever the unwise do attached to action,
that very thing a wise one, desirous of gathering worldly success, should do
without attachment.
26. One should not divert the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
action; a wise man who conducts himself joined in yoga should let them
learn how to perform actions lovingly.
Ordinary people become attached to their duties and the fruits received

therein, but wise is he who selflessly performs his duties for the welfare of
humanity. Because of his attachment, the ordinary person has no vision of the
horizon of the infinite and suffers on account of that limitation. He is always
afraid of giving up what he has, and without giving, one cannot receive.
Giving and sacrificing are one and the same act. Great men know only
giving, which motivates them to perform their duties for the benefit of
mankind.
In all social orders of the world, ordinary people follow the great men.
The great man, therefore, should not divert the minds of those who are
performing their duties but should help them learn how to do actions
skillfully. He should lead them to the level of consciousness in which duties
done without attachment lead to emancipation.
Students and clients complain, “My duties make me feel trapped. How
can I become free? Shall I remain in the situation that I am in, or shall I
change the situation?” For example a woman says, “My duties to my husband
and children have made me a slave.” The answer is that it is necessary to
perform one’s own duties, but if we do not learn to create love for the duties
that we have assumed, we will be doing them mechanically without
experiencing joy. For those who learn to love their duties and make all
possible efforts, the same duties that once created bondage then begin
creating happiness. Love is strengthened by giving and thwarted by
expectation. While doing duties, just give and you will receive joy. But if you
have the expectation of receiving love in return, and the other person from
whom you are expecting also expects, these two expectations will clash,
injuring the feelings of both parties. Expectation is not love but the source of
misery. If selfless giving is missing in the close relationship between husband
and wife, the family institution crumbles because the family is intended to
radiate love selflessly. Because selflessness is absent we see misery at home,
outside, and all over.
The wise person does not abruptly introduce ideas that are beyond the
comprehension of ordinary people, but he lovingly helps them to understand
without hurting them and brings them home gently. All profound teachings
are imparted by great people with love and gentleness. Forced teachings and
instructions abruptly imparted are either ineffective or create aversion. We
see that happening all the time between parents and children. Whenever the
parents are abrupt, though they have good intentions, they make rebels out of
their loving children. And that creates a huge gulf in communication. Higher

teachings can be intellectually imparted by anyone with the help of the
scriptures, but such teachings are not assimilated in the minds and hearts of
the students, for they lack the warmth of love and gentleness. But a good
teacher imparts the teachings with love and gentleness in his unique way.
Such a skill is rarely found. Those who have patience, tolerance, selfless
love, gentleness, and inner strength are careful not to abruptly introduce or
impose their ideas on others. It is an art that is not taught through books but
learned through experience and interaction. One might meet many
intellectuals and scholars who can recite the scriptures by heart, but how
often does one meet someone who imparts knowledge through love? Sri
Krishna by his own example and instruction is teaching Arjuna to perform his
duties with selfless love and to be an example for others.

27. With regard to the actions being performed by the gunas of Prakrit i,
jointly and severally, one whose nature is confused by ego believes, ‘I am
the agent of action.’
28. He, however, who knows the reality of the divisions of gunas and
actions, O Mighty-armed One, knows, ‘The gunas are interacting with
gunas.’ Knowing this he does not become attached.
Let us examine whether the human being alone is responsible for his
actions and their consequences. Human beings are in a position to function
more independently and profoundly than the animal and plant kingdoms and
the kingdom of inanimate objects. The human being is uniquely privileged to
act independently, whereas the animal kingdom is completely controlled by
nature. There is no free will for animals. But the human being has free will
and intelligence, which make him stand apart from the animal kingdom.
Actions like eating, sleeping, procreation, and those stemming from the urge
for self-preservation are found equally in both the human and animal
kingdoms. Those are the actions performed by nature. However, the human
being alone has the inherent capacity to perform actions without being
controlled by the basic urges. His will power and intelligence give him the

ability to understand, analyze, and control the motivations, desires, thoughts,
and emotions that are finally translated into action. He has the power to
change the course of the whole chain of events from motivation to desire to
thought to action. He can be aware of each aspect of the process that leads
him to act, and with proper training he can modify any part of it.
Even though he uses his inherent capacity to regulate and modify his
actions, the human being is not really the doer of his actions. All actions are
actually performed by the governing nature of the universe, called Prakriti.
The Self, seated unattached and unaffected in the inner chamber of one’s
being, always maintains its tranquility with all its glory and majesty. It is only
the ego that leads the human being to think and feel that he is the doer, the
performer of actions, and that he has the right to reap the fruits of his actions.
Here there is a subtle point to be understood: anyone who becomes a doer
also becomes the receiver of the fruits of his actions. One’s false sense of
doing and reaping creates misery for him, and he suffers on account of his
self-created misery. The ego thus needs to be purified and trained not to
identify itself as the doer but to remain a witness by being conscious of the
true Self, which exists eternally with its immortal and splendid nature.
The ego is one of four main functions of our internal organization. Our
internal organization is like that of a workshop, and the ego is the
representative of the real Self. When the ego forgets the real Self, when it
forgets that it is only a representative, it creates serious problems of
confusion and delusion within the internal organization. It does not counsel
with the other aspects of the internal organization and thus loses control over
the aspect of mind (manas) that functions both inside and outside and which
is actually the main instrument of both perception and conception. When the
ego shakes off its false vanity and remembers its role, then it does not create
bondage and barriers that stand between the aspirant and the real Self, the
source of consciousness and knowledge.
Egoism creates great suffering for the human being, but the wise person
does not allow his ego to create obstacles for his growth. He knows that, in
fact, actions are performed by Prakriti, the universal nature. Therefore he is
free from such deluded conceptions as: I have a desire to do, I want to do, I
am going to do, or I have done.
Prakriti has three qualities called gunas. Those three gunas—sattva,
rajas, and tamas—are distinct from one another yet function together.
Actually all actions performed by any aspect of nature are led by these three

qualities or gunas. The qualities of each object are different from one another.
So when two objects come into contact, there is a confrontation, and as a
result they either unite and thereby create something new, or they create
conflict. In this way the gunas are the source of action in the universe. These
three qualities exist together in the human being as well as in every aspect of
nature, but when one of them becomes predominant, one’s actions take on the
quality of the predominant guna. A deed performed in a state of tranquility is
a consequence of sattva guna. The deed in which rajas is predominant is
performed with a desire to reap the fruits. Tamas leads one to sloth and thus
to inaction. No one can remain without doing action, but when one does
action with an inert mind, there is no concentration. Therefore there is total
disintegration and chaos.
By studying and understanding these verses, we can realize that we are
mistaken to feed our egos, deluding ourselves that we are doing great deeds
or serving humanity. A child plucks a beautiful flower and hands it to his
mother saying, “Here, Mommy, I am giving this to you,” as though the gift
comes from him. But the gift of the flower was created by nature out of the
gunas, and the child, also motivated by the gunas, is merely transporting it
from one place to another, though claiming that it is his to give. The ego,
being the predominant part of the internal organization, is deluded by its false
identification with the qualities of the Self: it believes that it (the ego) is allpowerful and all-knowing, and that creates the bondage. But when one shakes
loose all the fetters by becoming aware of the Eternal, freedom is attained.
Modern psychologists have also asserted that the human being does not
perform actions but acts at the mercy of the forces of nature. In fact that is the
great insight of modern psychology, which in part arose as a reaction to the
rationalistic popular philosophies that preceeded it. Such philosophies held
that man acts out of his own rational choices. The behaviorists, however,
believe that the human being is moved by habits that are established by
reward and punishment. Freud argued that the conscious mind is just a small
part of the mind, and that human beings are predominantly moved by
unconscious forces. Jung and the archetypal psychologists go a step further
and dramatically assert that man is not the doer of actions. Their view is in
agreement with these verses, which are difficult to understand at first, for we
consistently think of ourselves as the initiators of our actions even though we
see other forms of life at the mercy of and reacting automatically to internal
and external forces outside of their control. Jung and archetypal psychologists

attempt to show that the archetypes, which exist at deeper layers of the
unconscious, are continually engaged in ritualistic dramas that are universal
and repeated again and again throughout generations. The conscious person,
they say, is merely an onlooker to these grand and glorious dramas rather
than the actor.

29. Those who are confused by the gunas of Prakriti become attached to
the actions of the gunas. One who knows the complete reality should not
cause conflict in the minds of dull-witted, little-knowing ones.
Ordinary people who are deluded by identifying with the qualities of
Prakriti vainly conclude that they are the performers and doers of the actions.
Such ignorant ones think that way, desiring to enjoy the fruits of their actions.
The person who knows and is able to dispel the cloud of ignorance should be
very careful not to do anything that would cause conflict in the minds of
ordinary people. Sri Krishna advises Arjuna not to be a bad example, deluded
by the sense of ego, and not to mislead the masses. A leader who has not
disciplined himself is unable to lead the masses in the right direction. A
leader should have perfect discipline, otherwise instead of serving the masses
he can mislead them.

30. With your mind centered on the Self, dedicating all actions to Me,
free of expectation and free of the thought “mine, “fight without the fever
of fear and anxiety.
He alone who has learned to direct all his energies and the power of his
thoughts, emotions, and desires to attain knowledge of the Self has freedom.
The common man remains conscious only of the world of objects, but those
who are conscious of the self-existent Reality direct all their energy inward
with a one-pointed desire to attain immortality. Ordinary people are ignorant
because of their outward desires. The objects of the external world constantly

lead one to identify with the changing phenomena and to forget the nature of
the Self, which is unchanging and everlasting.
Sri Krishna therefore says, “O Arjuna, dedicate all of your actions with a
one-pointed mind focused on the highest Self with no expectation or
attachment whatsoever. Without fear and anxiety, fight the battle of life.”
This verse talks of dedicated action, which actually is prayer in action. When
we pray but cannot dedicate our actions, that prayer is not of much use.
Dedicating all of our actions and the fruits we receive therein is higher than
the prayer that is uttered by our lips. The poems and hymns we utter are not
as profound or as important as dedication of the fruits of our actions. There
are two kinds of people: one praises God all the time, the other remains silent
and performs his actions, dedicating all the fruits of his actions to the Lord. It
is clear that the latter prayer is superior to the former.

31. Those children of Manu who ever steadfastly follow this teaching of
mine, filled with faith and without malice, they are even freed through
those very actions.
32. Those, however, who are critical and do not observe this teaching of
mine, know them, confused concerning all knowledge, to be mindless, who
perish.
Sri Krishna teaches that all actions are performed by nature. He says to
Arjuna, “Therefore shun the idea that you are a doer. Remain detached from
the sense of being a doer and be an example for others, for the ordinary
people always follow their leaders.” Ignorant are those who perform actions
thinking that they are the doers, but those who know that all actions are
performed by Prakriti and understand the mystery of all three gunas remain
free. In these verses Sri Krishna says, “Those who follow my teachings with
full faith rejoice in their life on earth.” Faith is a word that has been
repeatedly used by religionists. The expression, “Have faith,” is a common
one, but faith has many meanings. It may mean “do not argue; do not use
your mind but just follow me blindly.” But here the term faith does not have

the same meaning as when it is used by preachers and priests while giving
sermons in the temples and churches.
Shraddha (faith) implies that apart from the knowledge received from
the mind, there is yet another avenue still undiscussed and unknown. That
avenue opens spontaneously if one knows how to keep his mind from
intervening in that spontaneity. A sadhaka wants to have faith, but all sorts of
doubts created by the mind do not allow him to have faith. Faith is not the
product of the mind but something living that is experienced by opening the
path of the heart that leads to the dawning of spiritual love and intuition.
Many great sages attain a state of ecstasy by using the power of emotion, it
being higher than the power of thought. If the power of emotion is directed
with full heart, one is able to attain that knowledge which is never
experienced by the mind. The mind is like a small ruler, and human beings
like to measure the universe with the help of this small measuring stick. The
power of emotion, however, opens one to another, higher channel of
knowledge, which is called intuition.
There are three main channels of knowledge: intuition, intellect, and
instinct. Intuition, the highest channel of knowledge, is self-evident and does
not need support of any kind. The door to that knowledge opens with the
power of emotion (bhava) and not through mental gymnastics. In Verse 31
the path of faith and devotion is being introduced to Arjuna. Many students
who cannot follow the path of selfless action are led to follow the path of
faith, love, and devotion.
In these verses Sri Krishna opens that channel of knowledge, stressing
that the aspirant must have faith in the wisdom imparted by the great
teachers. He declares, “Have faith and follow, for the teachings expounded
by me are free from error.” Here Sri Krishna for the first time exercises his
authority with profound certainty in order to lead his beloved student deeper.
Often when a student enters into an argument or debate, he forgets that his
teacher is teaching not only on the basis of scriptural knowledge but also
from his experience of that knowledge. Though we have many experiences
every day, those experiences do not always guide us. But the inner
experience that has been attained directly is the best guide and instructor and
should be followed with full faith, without any doubt. There are many steps
that a disciple must fathom in relating to his competent teacher. The teacher
never gives such instructions as are given in these verses at the first instance
of the meeting with his disciple, but only when the communication between

the teacher and student is well established.
There is a prayer that is used even today before the teacher imparts the
knowledge of the divine: “May He protect us both, teacher and student. May
He lead us both to enjoy the bliss of liberation. May we both make efforts to
realize the truth of the scriptures. May our studies bear fruit. May we never
quarrel with each other.”
Before this teaching was imparted, Sri Krishna and Arjuna had a long
discussion, and, like any other student, Arjuna argued. There comes a stage
when one goes through a period of argumentation, and this state of mind
should not be shunned until all the doubts are resolved. Then the state free
from all doubts leads one to another channel of knowledge: intuition.
We have already said that there are three channels of knowledge. The
path of pure reason, buddhi, is followed by the fortunate few. The path of
buddhi yoga is used by those aspirants who are intellectually oriented for
performing duties in the world and also by yogis to control the senses, turn
the mind inward, and to finally resolve all questions. Intellectuals, however,
use the mind by employing their senses externally with the desire to enjoy
pleasures. They are lost in the world of pleasures, whereas yogis attain the
state of equilibrium, remaining non-attached and unaffected by the external
world and performing their duties skillfully. But among all the channels of
knowledge, intuition is the purest of all. And for receiving that knowledge,
the mind is not used. The power of emotion is evoked, and thus intuitive
knowledge is received.
The third channel of knowledge is also valid but does not lead the
student to the summit. That is instinctual knowledge, which is common to
both human beings and animals. It is a gift from nature and has the power to
cross the boundaries of past, present, and future. For instance, an animal can
sense and record the calamities that are about to happen. Pets sense an
earthquake long before it creates a disaster, and they leave their homes and
run for safety. Animals remain close to nature and are privileged to utilize
this channel of knowledge more than a human being can, because for a
human being there is always a choice in how to respond, and his mind is
distracted and dissipated. Man is usually lost in the jungle of thoughts, trying
to find out what to do through mental exercise alone. Thus he loses touch
with instinctual knowledge. Instinctual knowledge and intuitive knowledge
are quite distinct. Instinctual knowledge is the knowledge limited to the
boundaries of nature, whereas intuitive knowledge fathoms all the boundaries

of nature and leads the sadhaka to the timeless and infinite source of
knowledge. Most people do not understand the difference between instinctual
knowledge and intuitive knowledge. If someone has a premonition that a
close relative is about to die, he is said to be intuitive though he is actually
relying on instinctual knowledge. In the modern world the distinction
between instinctual and intuitive knowledge has been lost, and we think that
many people have access to intuitive knowledge when it is really instinctual
knowledge. Truth seekers, aspirants, and sadhakas alone have access to
intuitional knowledge.
The word shraddha, which is used in Verse 31, is an ancient word that
refers to three qualities that are explained by this formula: reverence plus
devotion leads to conviction. It is not a faith dependent on belief but firm
faith attained through one-pointed devotion. Shraddha directed toward one’s
teacher is attained by a disciple after long experience on the path. Those
aspirants who follow the instructions of the teacher with full conviction are
not lost in the conflicts created by the allurements of the world. Those who
do not have shraddha, firm conviction in what they are doing, destroy
themselves. The aspirants who understand the importance of the teaching
given in the 30th verse learn to dedicate all their actions and the fruits of their
actions to the Lord of life and cast off the fetters created by attachment. The
ignorant, acting on the basis of fallacious reasoning, remain confused,
distracted, and doubtful, and a mind full of doubt causes ruin. Those who are
devoid of faith are not fit for sadhana and are therefore unable to attain Truth.
Such ignorant people see the dark side of everything and waste time in fault
finding. But those who follow their path with full conviction and implicit
faith finally attain the highest goal. Such faith is necessary on the path of
sadhana. Patanjali, the codifier of yoga science, supports this idea in the Yoga
Sutras (1:14). He says that sadhana should be continued for a long time
without any break and with full and firm faith. Such faith and conviction are
essential; without them treading the path is impossible. Full conviction is
attainment in itself. One should be sure that it is not lost. Maintaining and
strengthening faith is the highest state of sadhana.

33. Even a person with knowledge acts according to his nature. Beings

resort to their nature. What can self control do?
Sri Krishna further explains the functioning of the three gunas that
motivate one to perform action. He says that it is not easy to fathom the
barriers created by the gunas. The relative proportions of the three qualities
differ from one individual to another. In one person one guna is more
predominant while in another a different guna predominates. These
differences are a result of one’s past.
The words svabhava prakriti, used in Verse 33, mean “that which is
brought forward by births, the inherent nature of a creature.” It compels one
to act according to his samskaras (svabhava). Thus self-transformation
becomes difficult, and forced methods of restraint do not help. One should
therefore not impose such restraints on himself unless he is fully prepared.
First the desire to discipline and transform oneself should be strongly felt.
The gunas function no matter how much restraint one practices. That restraint
which is practiced by the ignorant and leads to suppression and repression is
not real sadhana. Mere restraint will not help one to cross the barriers of
Prakriti. But that does not mean one should cease practicing self-control,
disciplining himself, and directing the senses in a controlled way. The
practices of self-transformation are different from suppression and repression.
Through self-discipline one develops his positive qualities, and gradually the
sattva guna predominates. Sattva is the inherent quality that alone gives the
sadhaka power to have a tranquil mind, and that enables him to cross the mire
of delusion created by rajas and tamas.
For treading the path of faith, one should learn to be detached from the
confusion and conflicts created by the constant reasoning of the mind.
Scriptural knowledge and mere reasoning are not at all helpful in the
upliftment and unfoldment of the sadhaka. It is therefore important for a
sadhaka to understand his own nature and with firm faith to attain a sattvic
state of mind.

34. There are attractions and aversions already facing each and every
sense. One should not come under their control, for they are highwaymen
waiting for him on the path.
35. Better one’s own dharma, even devoid of quality, than the dharma of
another, even though well performed. Better to die in one’s own dharma;
the dharma of another invites danger.
The senses respond spontaneously to the objects of the world. Each of
the five senses—seeing, touching, hearing, tasting, and smelling—has their
objects—color, that which can be felt, sound, taste, and odor respectively.
Each has a distinct mode of perception. The tongue can taste but cannot hear;
the eyes can see but cannot taste. Each sense has its own duty to perform, and
in performing its duty it flows to its respective objects. When the senses
contact their objects, one experiences like and dislike, attraction and
repulsion. Ordinary minds react according to those two feelings. Their
positive or negative responses to sensory objects keep them from
experiencing objectively. That which one person adores is a matter of
repulsion to another. Even a sage recognizes something as bitter and
something else as sweet, but he does not react like the ordinary person. The
sage realizes that it is not the object that causes like or dislike but one’s own
prejudices, so he learns to tame both reactions. Sages maintain aloofness.
They do not waste precious moments of their life in hating or being attracted
to others or the objects of the world. Both lust and hatred obstruct the
sadhaka’s growth again and again. Once they are known and understood and
their value is reduced to nothingness, they lose the power to influence the
sadhaka. Arjuna’s wish to remove those obstacles is evident. Thus Sri
Krishna introduces disciplines in order to help Arjuna perform his duty
without being disturbed by those feelings.
Existence and duty are inseparable not only in human life but in nature
as well. The sun shines; that is its duty. Likewise all the modes of nature such
as fire, water, and air perform their duties. In the human body all the senses
and limbs perform their respective duties. If someone foolishly asks the
hearing sense to see, he will be disappointed. Therefore an individual should
learn to perform his duty according to his svabhava, the gifts received from
his inherent nature.
A student can progress on the path of unfoldment by learning to study
his inner potentials, for the duty that one performs should be according to his

dharma. One is born with certain qualities into a particular environment, and
if he does not discharge his duties according to his dharma but follows the
dharma of another, it could prove dangerous and even fatal. If a professor of
cultural studies is sent to the battlefield and a soldier who is trained to be an
artillery expert is sent to teach philosophy, both will be unsuccessful,
disappointed, and put to shame by others. Therefore one should learn to
follow his own dharma and to discharge his duty and progress as an example
for others to follow.
The following is a summary of the several kinds of knowledge that have
been described thus far. First there is knowledge that is given to us by our
sense perception. On the basis of that, we conceptualize and formulate our
conclusions. That is the lowest way of knowing, for the mind remains
clouded, and all of the objects perceived by the senses in the external world
are ever changing. Thus sense perception is inaccurate and inexact. Such
incomplete perception comes before the mind for conceptualization, and by
the time the clouded mind formulates and concludes, one’s experience of the
external world is even more distorted. Perceptualizaton and conceptualization
give only a partial and distorted view of the objective world.
Another source of knowledge is instinctual knowledge. It also crosses
the boundaries of time and space and is able to give a glimpse of the future,
but it too is limited. Nevertheless it has some purpose: children and animals
that are led by this force know many things that are not known by ordinary
people.
Two other sources of knowledge that complement one another are
knowledge through the mind and knowledge through emotion. There is
always imbalance if we do not understand the importance of both of these
powers. The power of emotion can help the sadhaka by inspiring him and can
raise his consciousness to higher dimensions. Bhava, emotion, should not be
lost. It is a great help, a force in the path of self-control. The knowledge that
flows through bhava is a great force, and there are no interruptions in that
flow. But the knowledge that flows through the mind creates many stagnant
pools if it is not allowed to go through the filtration of pure reason. Many
times the answers that cannot be figured out by a well-balanced mind are
given by bhava, emotion. The stream of knowledge that flows through the
mind moves into many nooks and corners, and because of impurities of the
mind, this creates small and big stagnant pools, and thus the stream becomes
polluted. The stream of bhava is like a river in flood. It rushes like a beloved

running toward her lover who does not care about any obstacles, and is not
afraid of being caught or trapped. In the stream of bhava, one does not have
an enjoyable experience of the path, for he is suddenly transported. He
reaches the summit without experience of the path.
The highest of all streams of knowledge is the flow of intuition, which is
perfect. Its knowledge is the purest. That flow becomes evident and visible
only after we learn that the stream of knowledge that flows through the mind
is very lengthy and is full of obstacles. One can get lost on the way. Thus the
aspirant learns to shut the gate that stops the knowledge flowing through the
mind and opens the gate that allows intuitive knowledge to flow to its place.
Both yoga psychology and modern psychology have shown considerable
interest in differentiating amongst people according to personality or
character types. As we have already noted, ancient psychologists have
divided people into four categories according to their propensities, and that
division has unfortunately evolved into the caste system of India. It is
interesting to note that Carl Jung also considered there to be four fundamental
personality types, and that the types he differentiated parallel to a certain
extent the ways of knowing that have been described in the Bhagavad Gita.
In Jung’s schema there is the personality type dominated by sensation, the
thinking type, the feeling type, and the intuitive type. However, there are
some interesting differences between Jung’s categorization and the ways of
knowing that have been described. For instance, Jung’s feeling type is not at
all equivalent to knowledge through emotion, as some might think. Rather it
is closely related to the experience of like and dislike as described in Verse
34. The feeling type relates to the world primarily along the dimension of
liking or disliking what he experiences. From the perspective of yoga
psychology Jung’s intuitive type is a misnomer. What Jung is actually
describing is the personality that functions primarily through instinctive
knowledge. As we have noted, intuition according to the yogic perspective is
a mode of knowledge that is beyond the ken of the ordinary human being.
Carl Jung also observed that if one does not live in accord with his
personality type but tries to be that which he is not, a neurosis is created. For
instance, if a sensation type is forced by external circumstances to live as an
intellectual, a severe disturbance will be created in his psyche. Jung’s
conception parallels the yogic concept of living according to one’s dharma.

Arjuna said
36. Now, propelled by whom does this person commit sin even not
wanting to, O Krishna, as though impelled by force?

The Blessed Lord said
37. This is desire, this is anger, born of the guna called rajas, consumer
of much, very evil; know it to be your enemy here in the world.
38. As fire is veiled by smoke or a mirror is by dust, as a fetus is covered
with placenta, so is this world of activities covered by desire.
39. It is by this eternal enemy of the wise that knowledge is covered, the
insatiable fire in the form of desire, O Son of Kunti.
40. The senses, mind, and intellect are its resort; it is by these that it
covers knowledge and confuses the body-bearing one.
Human beings do not intentionally want to create obstacles for
themselves, yet they create them. What instigates the human being to create
obstacles to his growth? Why can’t he live life free of harmful acts? What is
that which compels him to do that which is not to be done? When Arjuna
asks these questions, Sri Krishna replies that the knowledge of the three
gunas has already been imparted to him. It is rajas, one of the qualities of

human nature, that prompts one to commit harmful or evil actions. Rajas
leads the human being to be active and to do actions motivated by certain
desires. Rajas has the quality of projecting itself onto the external world and
thus creates a mirage, delusion, confusion, and conflicts. One’s projections
become the charms, attractions, and temptations. Those tempting forms are
actually part and parcel of oneself, but those alluring qualities have been
projected outward by rajas, and one foolishly chases after those mirages
taking them to be real.
When one’s desire is fulfilled he becomes proud, and when it is not
fulfilled he gets angry. Pride and anger are two enemies of man. As the
clouds hide the sun, as smoke hides the fire, desire obscures the faculty of
discrimination and thereby obscures knowledge and controls the mind,
intelligence, and senses. Whether the desire is fulfilled or unfulfilled, the
mind remains in a state of imbalance and abnormality.
A man of desires becomes self-centered and isolates himself from the
reality of the phenomenal world. That leads him to create his own reality. No
matter how many sensory pleasures he experiences, the desires of the selfish
man are never fulfilled. The more desires one has, the more discontent he
becomes. For when one desire is fulfilled, it gives birth to other desires. For
example, if the desire to own a house is fulfilled, the fulfillment of that desire
gives birth to many other desires, such as having a better house than one’s
neighbors, a nice garden, new furniture, and a swimming pool. Desires are
endless; desire is a canine hunger that is never satisfied or pacified no matter
how much one tries to fulfill it. If one puts fuel into the fire, the fire is not
quenched but burns more fiercely. Similarly, if one devotes his energy to the
fulfillment of sensory desires, instead of experiencing fulfillment his desires
only increase.
The wise man understands that desire, which creates misery for him, is
produced by rajas. Therefore he practices to attain sattvic virtues and thus
achieve a state of tranquility, which is the nature of sattva. Ordinary people
are infatuated with sensual desire, kama. Kama is the prime desire that gives
birth to anger, greed, attachment, jealousy, and pride. Wherever desire
dwells, one suffers from these other evils as well. The sage knows this and
thus always remains vigilant, for desire is such a powerful motivation that it
is even capable of blinding the reason of good sadhakas.
The senses, mind, and intelligence of ordinary people are controlled by
their desires, for when one desires to enjoy sensory pleasures, his

intelligence, mind, and senses are externalized, turned outward toward the
objects of desire. Sense, mind, and intelligence are the abodes in which the
parasite desire dwells. If one’s intelligence, mind, and senses are not trained,
they feed the parasite in the same way that fuel feeds the fire. Desire robs the
senses, mind, and intelligence of their energy. But that which is the enemy
can also become a friend. When one realizes the grand game being played by
the gunas, he strengthens only one desire: the desire to attain the state of
equilibrium. Then instead of being an enemy, that desire is a necessary
means. When a sadhaka has a burning desire to attain freedom, he learns to
light the fire of knowledge. He bathes in that fire, and all his worldly desires
are burned to ashes. The desire for tranquility alone remains.

41. Therefore, first control the senses, O Arjuna. A bandon this evil that
destroys knowledge and the experience of spiritual realities.
It is important to understand here that the battle of Kurukshetra is a
battle that is fought in every human heart and mind. Therefore the historical
authenticity of the battle is of no significance for us. Our concern is with the
message of the Bhagavad Gita and the way modern man can benefit from its
great teachings. We are in search of certain specifics, and this verse explains
what the battle is really about, where it takes place, and why it should be
fought. Sri Krishna says that desire clouds human intelligence and controls
the mind and senses. Therefore one must learn to have full control of his
desires, which are the prime enemy. We have already explained that this
refers to the desires that distract and dissipate the energy of the sadhaka. Sri
Krishna tells Arjuna to kill that evil desire with the sword of discrimination.

42. The senses are said to be powerful; beyond the senses is the mind;
beyond the mind is intellect. The one beyond the intellect, however, is the

Self.
43. Thus awakening to the One who is beyond intellect, holding and
supporting self by the Self, destroy this elusive enemy in the form of desire,
O Mighty-armed One.
The methods of controlling the senses are concentration and meditation.
When the sadhaka desires to attain the highest state of tranquility and to have
profound knowledge of the Absolute, his worldly desires are assimilated into
that one desire. Thus the outgoing tendency of the senses is controlled, and
the mind becomes one-pointed. From here starts the inward journey.
The flow of perennial knowledge has its source beyond the body, senses,
mind, and intellect. The word para, which means beyond, is used here.
Through mere scriptural knowledge the meaning of para cannot be
comprehended, but the sadhaka can easily grasp its meaning through direct
experience. The knowledge of the inward journey, which leads the sadhaka
from the gross level of consciousness to the subtlemost level, is essential. The
word para means the beyond within, not outside. Many seekers interpret the
word para in an external sense, but actually it is used here to indicate the
levels of consciousness that already exist within us.
Beyond the body consciousness is the field created by sense perception,
and beyond the field of sense perception is another higher and subtler realm
of mind, and then there lies the vast field of the unconscious. But subtlemost
is the center of consciousness that lies beyond the unconscious. It is called
Atman. The senses command and control the body; all the physical
movements remain under the control of the senses. The senses, however, are
employed by the mind and are directed by the intellect. Over and above all,
the Self governs the intellect, mind, senses, and body. Having knowledge of
the truth that the self is ruled by the Self, one learns to follow the path of
discipline, which helps him to attain the center of pure consciousness.
Verses 42 and 43 are especially important to understand from the
viewpoint of sadhana. They show that disciplining the body, breath, senses,
and mind is an important requisite that helps one to redirect the flow of
energy, consciousness, to its fountainhead instead of allowing it to flow to the
objects of the external world and to create more distractions. Worldly desires
and an undisciplined mind and senses are great enemies. Worldly desire
endlessly breeds more desires. Therefore such desires should be completely
shunned.

Here ends the third chapter, in which the message of doing actions
skillfully is explained.

Chapter Four
Knowledge of Renouncing Fruits

The Blessed Lord said
1. I taught this immutable yoga to Vivasvat; Vivasvat taught it to Manu;
Manu taught it to Ikshvaku.
2. Royal sages knew this yoga as it was handed down in the lineage of
the tradition. Then over a long period of time this yoga disappeared, O
Scorcher of Enemies.
3. That very ancient yoga I have taught you today, as you are My devotee
as well as My friend. This is the highest secret.
Yoga science is as eternal as human existence. This noble tradition is a
perennial stream of knowledge that flows from eternity to eternity. It is
knowledge that is not subject to destruction. The knowledge so far imparted
by Sri Krishna is jnana yoga of the Samkhya system and karma yoga. Both of
these aspects of eternal knowledge, one containing the profound philosophy
of life and the other the way of living according to that philosophy, together
make life a beautifully poetic song. Such knowledge remains ever young and
ever fresh in all conditions. That is why the message of the Bhagavad Gita is

called the perennial song. This song carries the all-encompassing and
profound knowledge of the individual and the universe, of the world within
and without. Knowledge was never born and therefore never dies. It is not
possessed by anyone, for it is always there in all times—past, present, and
future—for all seekers.
When Sri Krishna states with all certainty that he had expounded this
knowledge to Vivasvat, who then had communicated it to Manu and others,
he is saying that karma yoga is as ancient as any other path. All the kings in
ancient times followed this path that finally leads one to perfection. Sri
Krishna is instructing Arjuna to follow the same path that was followed by
his ancestors. With the passage of time, this knowledge was lost. For when a
nation reveres and preserves the records of the ancients but ignores its
application, knowledge is reduced to theoretical conclusions. Sri Krishna is
imparting the forgotten knowledge of both theory and practice to Arjuna.
Such supreme secrets are imparted by great teachers only to the deserving
ones.
All the kings preceding Arjuna for many centuries, as well as Sri
Krishna and Arjuna, were from the same ancient tradition. In ancient times in
the kingdom of Bharata there lived two traditions. One was called the solar
race and the other the lunar race, for they identified themselves with the sun
and moon respectively. The solar tradition of Sri Krishna is considered to be
the highest of all traditions. It is the tradition of light and knowledge. The sun
is the symbol of light: it radiates for all without any selfish motivation yet
remains above, unattached, and never tires of radiating its light. The sun is
known by its own light, whereas all other things are known by the light of the
sun. Sri Krishna, a great sage of the solar tradition, reminds Arjuna of his
connection with that tradition. In the third chapter the example of Janaka, the
king and sage, was given by Sri Krishna to remind Arjuna that Janaka is a
link in that unbroken chain of sages and that Arjuna also comes from that
same tradition.
There are many streams of knowledge all coming from one and the same
source. When we study the history of the great traditions without bias, we
come to know that the unbroken ancient traditions continue to offer
something of value to modern man. For example, despite a series of
persecutions, the Jewish tradition is still as lively as before because that race
follows its tradition today as it did in ancient times. Such traditions have
something special in their culture and character that helps them to live with

the hope of building their rising generations around the same principles
followed by their ancients.
Sri Krishna has the ability to see the past, present, and future. That is a
yogic ability attained by going beyond the time factor to the timeless infinite
and eternal. When Sri Krishna says that he taught the ancients the same
knowledge, it means that he is talking to Arjuna in a state of oneness with the
Eternal, which is never born and therefore never dies. The great sages have
access to the past and future, and they can connect the missing links. That
helps one to study past, present, and future at one glance. For Sri Krishna all
happenings are happenings of here and now.
Sri Krishna states that Arjuna is both his devotee and friend. That is an
unusual relationship. A sense of devotion exists between God and his servant,
but friendship is a term used for two equals. The student often does not
communicate with his teacher because of his awe and devotion. For lack of
communication, he does not understand the profound meaning of the words
imparted by the teacher. The student is a devotee, but the teacher treats him
like a friend so that in a friendly atmosphere the law of love and equality can
reveal itself to the devotee. Between a lover and the beloved there will always
be a huge gulf if the sense of equality and compassion is not shared without
reservation. A teacher is a friend, yet such a friend deserves reverence. It is
said that in the ladder of love, the first rung is reverence, and devotion is
reverence indeed. Love and reverence establish a perfect way of
communication. The higher secrets can only be imparted by a friend to a
friend. Sri Krishna has so far imparted the knowledge of jnana and karma
yoga. Now he is imparting the secrets of attaining happiness by renouncing
the fruits of one’s actions. Higher knowledge is only imparted to the beloved
students, for such knowledge cannot be understood by ordinary people.

Arjuna said
4. Your birth was later and the birth of Vivasvat much earlier; how shall
I understand this, that you taught it in the beginning?

The Blessed Lord said
5. Many births of Mine have passed and so have yours, O Arjuna. I know
them all, but you do not know them, O Scorcher of Enemies.
6. Though unborn, the immutable Self, being even the Lord of beings,
yet I incarnate with my own power, having perfect control over my Prakriti.
Arjuna now understands that the instructions that Sri Krishna is
imparting are a profound part of that which was handed down by a long
tradition. But Arjuna’s mind rambles in the garden of confusion when he
hears Sri Krishna say that he had also imparted that knowledge to Vivasvat.
He wonders, “My master and teacher is standing before me. How could he
possibly have taught Vivasvat who lived thousands of years ago?” Arjuna
becomes confused, and his doubts are very genuine. He says, “O Lord, later
is your birth, much earlier the birth of Vivasvat. How shall I understand
this?” In order to dispel ignorance the master, referring to past incarnations,
says, “For you know them not, and I know them all. Atman is eternal; it is
never born and never destroyed. I, as Atman, am the cause of the universe
and the Lord of all beings. I have perfect control over my Prakriti; I incarnate
with my own power and not because of the chain of cause and effect.” Birth
and death cannot be attributed to the birthless Atman, yet it has the power to
incarnate. Ordinary minds cannot grasp this truth, but sages have no difficulty
in understanding it.
The sages understand that the past, present, and future are mere

moments in the unbroken chain of life. These moments are synchronous;
therefore to the realized ones past and future are the same as the here and
now. The ordinary mind has no capacity to uncover the secrets of death and
birth, past and future, but those who have attained knowledge of the timeless
can easily comprehend the philosophy of reincarnation.
Most of the spiritual traditions of the world believe in the philosophy of
reincarnation. Non-believing poses more serious questions than believing,
such as why are we forced to be born? Is birth just an accident without any
cause? Is birth the total responsibility of Providence, a choice of the Lord
who is considered to be the creator of this world? The traditions that do not
believe in rebirth or dismiss the issue do not satisfactorily answer these
questions. Ordinary people follow the injunctions of the religious scriptures
blindly, but it is a demand of an intellectual and inquiring mind to resolve the
conflicts created by unanswered questions such as: From where have I come?
Why have I come? What is the purpose of my life? Where will I go? The
philosophy of rebirth and reincarnation alone provides satisfactory answers to
these questions.
Many Westerners react defensively when they encounter the philosophy
of reincarnation. They dismiss it as a primitive, spooky, or fanciful
conception. They are not at all able to consider the merits or deficiencies of
this view in an objective way. They are repulsed by the idea of reincarnation
and do not want to hear anything about it. It is a clear sign of egotism when
one refuses lo examine an issue objectively and to expand the horizon of his
vision. Most Westerners are afraid of the unknown, though they are equally
dissatisfied with the known. Their insecurity leads them to further fortify
their egos. It is a vicious cycle.
Many Western philosophers such as Plato, Schopenhauer, Kant, and
Hegel believed in the philosophy of reincarnation. And there are many people
able to recall their pasts verbatim. The validity of reincarnation cannot be
decided by debates; it is subject to Self-realization. When one attains a more
evolved state of consciousness, his latent memories from his long past unfold
themselves before his consciousness.
There are millions of people in today’s world who are infatuated with
the external and temporal. But there are only a few great and enlightened
teachers. For the most part, the blind are leading the blind. Death and birth do
not reveal their secrets to ordinary people. Only sages or yogis know these
secrets. Ordinary people experience the pangs of death and birth, but divine

incarnations such as Sri Krishna do not. These great ones consciously assume
various garbs in order to give the message according to the needs of the
masses. This type of incarnation is a rebirth of that great man who has
already attained the highest, but the ordinary person’s death and birth results
from the desire to enjoy the world and its pleasures. The minds of ordinary
people are entangled by mundane and temporal desires, but the great ones are
beyond the influences of the gunas and are thus free from desire.
Death is but a habit of the body, a change—not complete annihilation. It
is like passing through an exit in a fortress and then coming back in from
another entrance. The pangs of death disturb those who cling to life and to the
temptations of the mundane world, but death is not at all terrifying and never
a painful experience. It is the fear of death that is the source of the pain that
one experiences. Such a fear has no basis, but it remains unexamined by
ordinary minds. When one thoroughly examines his fear of death, he realizes
that that which is inevitable should be accepted. There is no need for any fear.
Fear of not gaining what one wants, fear of losing what one already has, fear
of separation, fear of death, fear of the unknown, and all the various kinds of
fears dwell within weak minds and defeat the purpose of life. The ancients
knew that the sense of self-preservation creates fear. They led their students
to encounter their fears, to remove them, and to attain the state of
fearlessness. Fear is a self-created suffering that does not allow one to enjoy
any object of the world. It mars the joys of life from the sense level to the
mental level, and even in the unconscious. Once fear makes the unconscious
its permanent abode, it is difficult to get rid of it. Arjuna suffered on account
of fear, but Sri Krishna, a master and Lord of life, helps Arjuna by sharing
the supreme wisdom.
When a teacher imparts the knowledge of the three bodies (the gross,
subtle, and causal), the student understands that the gross material body lives
only for a short time between the two events of birth and death. The subtle
body is the possessor of the impressions in the unconscious. It is composed of
samskaras, impressions of all sorts, both merits and demerits from one’s past.
The subtle body lives as long as those impressions exist. The causal body,
however, lasts for a long time. It is composed of the latent part of the
impressions or samskaras that live in a quiet and dormant corner of the
unconscious. Those who do not have knowledge of these three bodies
identify only with the biological needs of the gross body. But the aspirant
who is conscious of these three bodies knows that the physical body is just a

gross covering.
There are yogis who go beyond these three bodies to a timeless state,
and the knowledge they attain enables them to know past, present, and future
in exactly the way that an ordinary man has awareness of only the recent past.
They experience the past, present, and future in the same way that ordinary
people experience things of the world during the waking state. Sri Krishna is
the knower of that science, whereas Arjuna is only aware of his body and its
relationship to the external world. Love for the body and objects of the world
is a love of poor quality; it is not dependable. Arjuna is not aware of the more
subtle bodies, so it is impossible for him to recall the past. Ignorant people
remain deluded and suffer, but a great yogi like Sri Krishna has perfect
knowledge, for he knows all the past births.

7. Whenever there is a diminution of dharma, O Descendant of Bharata,
and a rise of unrighteousness, then I incarnate Myself forth.
8. For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the evildoers, for
the purpose of establishing dharma, I incarnate Myself from age to age.
When dharma is forgotten and duty is ignored, when those who are
committed to their duties are molested by the wicked and unrighteous, when
the entire social order is taken over by evil-minded people, then the Lord
incarnates Himself to establish dharma once again. The word bharata means
love of knowledge. The Lord also incarnates for the sake of those who have
love for knowledge and righteousness. Some people misuse this verse; they
do not understand that although an incarnation comes to guide the people, the
people also have to make efforts to transform themselves. Such people
become dependent on the incarnation to do it all for them. They do not make
efforts to know and understand the law of karma and how to perform duties
skillfully. Thus they fall prey to laziness, sloth, and inertia, believing that an
incarnation will descend and they will be redeemed. That kind of thinking
can cause the downfall of both the individual and the nation. It can also give
birth to false prophets.

There is a difference between being born and being incarnated. Ordinary
people have no control over birth and death, but He who is Lord of life has all
power under His control and thereby descends by His own will to bring back
those who have forgotten their direction. Ignorant, misdirected human beings
suffer, and the incarnation of the Lord comes to show them the path of
wisdom. This has happened throughout the history of mankind.
Religionists believe that God incarnates, and religions are in fact based
on this belief. But they believe in only one such incarnation and follow only
that one. They claim that other incarnations are false and that they mislead
the people. This reflects the circumscribed and egocentric view of both those
who are responsible for maintaining the religious institutions and their
followers as well. Any institution, religious or otherwise, seeks to perpetuate
and expand itself at the expense of those outside that system. Such an egooriented and competitive way of being narrows one and does not allow
knowledge to shine forth.
If God can incarnate once, why can’t He incarnate again and again?
Western religionists do not accept the philosophy of the reincarnation of God
because it threatens their institutions. They repeat, “Have faith, have faith,
have faith,” but why and how remains unexplained. Their explanation is
vague and is mere pacification. It does not satisfy those with inquiring minds.
The yogic understanding is that Love and Truth incarnate periodically and
become abundantly visible on earth. The same message is given, yet with a
different emphasis according to the needs of the times. There is no
sectarianism in the Bhagavad Gita. Sri Krishna is not speaking as a particular
personality but as the universal source of love and truth.

9. He who knows My divine birth and action in its subtlety, after leaving
the body, no longer goes to another birth; he comes to Me, O Arjuna.
10. They who have freed themselves from attraction, fear, and anger—
many, purified by the asceticism of knowledge, absorbed in Me, have come
to identification with Me.

These verses explain that birth and death are not under the control of
nature but under the control of the individual self. Life and relationship are
inseparable: life externally and internally is relationship. The body is related
to the breath, the body and breath to the emotions, the conscious to the
unconscious mind, and so on. The two units of the self, the mortal part and
the immortal part, separate when one dies. The body, breath, and conscious
mind are mortal. But even after death the vehicle that carries and preserves all
the subtle impressions, the unconscious mind, remains undecayed, and
therein the seeds of desire are preserved. These seeds sprout in search of
fulfillment and then grow again and give birth to many new seeds, just as an
acorn sprouts and grows into a tree that produces many more acorns. Cause
and effect live together; birth and death and an individual’s circumstances are
therefore determined by the individual and his nature. Beliefs such as “I am
created by God, and my miseries are also created by God” are based on
fallacious concepts. Such unphilosophical, illogical, and irrational beliefs
lead ordinary people to suffer. You are the way you wanted to be, and you
will be the way you want to be. Those who have attained the knowledge of
the Absolute are released from the bondage of births and deaths, for they
have gone beyond the sphere of the gunas; they have given up desire.
Therefore there are no seeds, and therefore there is no tree.
There are three categories of beings: ordinary people who have no
control over death and birth; great yogis and sages (muktas) who have
attained liberation and have perfect control over death and birth; and
incarnations who are forces of the Absolute, free from bondage, who come
only to guide and help mankind. Birth and incarnation appear to be alike, but
actually they are not. Incarnation is a descending force of the Lord beyond
the sphere of the gunas and free from bondage. Birth and incarnation are
similar events, but they have two separate causes. When the instructions
imparted by the incarnation are faithfully practiced by the sadhaka, his
experiential knowledge guides him to the summit where he becomes one with
the highest.
Human beings are children of God, and children have the same potential
as their parents. They simply need to unfold and grow. Essentially and
qualitatively, a single drop of the ocean has all the qualities of the ocean.
When a drop meets the ocean, it becomes the ocean. Verse 10 teaches that
one can attain more than mere intellectual knowledge of the Absolute. In this
verse Sri Krishna is not referring to worship of the Lord as a separate entity,

but he is making one aware that the potentials one has are exactly like that of
the divine Lord. The entire dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna is a
dialogue between the pure absolute I and the relative I of the human being.
This verse says that the I of the human being is capable of becoming
inseparable from and one with the divine.
Many modern students might conclude that Sri Krishna’s teachings are
sectarian; that the Bhagavad Gita teaches that one should only take refuge in
Sri Krishna and in no other form of God. That is not true. Sri Krishna speaks
from the heights of that one universal consciousness that is beyond even
divine forms and from which the divine forms come. He is not speaking only
as a specific incarnation. He is one with all incarnations, and at the same time
he is beyond all incarnations.
Though all incarnations are one in their source, authority, and state of
consciousness, each clothes the eternal message in a different wrapping. The
aspirant is not able to dive completely into the teachings of all incarnations.
He will progress most directly if he absorbs himself in one tradition while
respecting all others. When he starts practicing sadhana, the seeker is strictly
warned to follow only one path, the path he is taught by his teacher, and not
to follow other paths. For if one changes the path he follows every now and
then, he will not be able to attain the Absolute. Students often leave the path
they have practiced, running here and there, which is a sheer waste of time
and energy and above all brings complete dissatisfaction and disappointment.
That is the actual sense hidden in this verse.

11. Whosoever in whatever way submit themselves to Me, I confer grace
on them in the very same way. Human beings in all different ways follow
My path, O Son of Pritha.
12. Desiring fulfillment of actions, many here sacrifice to gods. In the
human world, accomplishment comes quickly as a result of action.
Whatever path one follows up a mountain, he finally reaches the
summit. Though the ways are diverse, the goal is one. Sri Krishna explains

that although people follow various paths to Self-realization, finally they
reach one and the same Absolute. Some seekers waste considerable time
trying to know this path and that path. And other seekers are confused by the
diversity of spiritual paths. It is important for the seeker to start treading his
path and to continue on it instead of being lost in the bewilderment of
diversity.
Ordinary men worship various gods with the desire of receiving reward.
They undoubtedly receive the fruits of their actions. Those who desire
worldly gain receive it; to those who are desirous of knowledge, knowledge
is given; and to those who desire mukti (liberation), that is given to them.
Everyone reaps the fruits of his actions according to the universal law: as you
sow, so shall you reap. Instead of realizing that one receives according to his
actions and thus paying attention to and doing their duties skillfully, many
people believe that God is capriciously rewarding or punishing them. They
praise God when they are successful and blame Him when they fail. Their
irresponsible attitude leads them toward irresponsible behavior. Such people
want to enjoy the fruits of their actions but do not want to take responsibility
for discharging their duties. As a result they do not receive the fruits they
want. The law of karma is inevitable. Therefore one should perform his
duties skillfully with a one-pointed and tranquil mind.
Modern psychotherapy also helps clients to realize that they are
responsible for their own actions. Most clients who enter therapy believe that
others are responsible for their misery. They either blame their parents or
society for the way they were treated as a child, or they blame their spouses,
relatives, friends, or the circumstances in their current life. One of the main
tasks of a teacher or psychotherapist is to lead the student or client to
recognize that he is responsible for his own predicament: that only he can
change his circumstances, his attitude, and his behavior. Here the teachings
of the Bhagavad Gita and modern psychotherapy have much in common,
although the Bhagavad Gita is more direct and didactic in bringing the
student to that realization, whereas modern psychotherapy gradually guides
the client in changing his perspective.*

13. I have created the four-fold division of humanity on the basis of their

qualities and actions. Though I am its creator, know Me to be the
immutable one who does not become an agent of action.
Every creature acts because of the three gunas or qualities. All three
gunas are present in each person but in different proportions. That is why
different people have different natures. Some people have tamas as the
predominant guna, which leads them toward lethargy and identification with
worldly objects; others have rajas predominant leading them to action; and in
others, the sattva guna is strongest, and they have the greatest understanding.
The actions of ordinary people are guided by the predominance of either rajas
or tamas. Because they desire to enjoy worldly pleasures, they do not develop
the sattva quality and allow it to become predominant.
It is possible to classify personality types according to the predominance
of one guna or another. It is interesting to note that although modern
psychologists and physiologists are unaware of this concept of the gunas,
they classified people along similar lines. Sheldon studied the body types of
numerous people and found that subjects could best be classified according to
the relative predominance of these factors. It was found that people who are
dominated by fatty tissue tend to enjoy sensory pleasure and to be more
passive and lethargic than others. Those who have a predominance of muscle
tissue, the mesomorphs, are action oriented. And those in whose bodies the
nervous system takes precedence over fatty and muscular tissue are more
oriented toward understanding than toward sensuality or action. The parallel
between the system of the gunas and the body typology of these modern
psychologists is striking. According to the system described in the Bhagavad
Gita, it is the gunas that lead one to develop one or another body and
personality type. They classify people according to the relative proportions of
each of the three characteristics. That was also done in ancient India: a
fourfold classification was established that later became the caste system.
It is unfortunate that these groupings are taken as separate castes, for
that has created a wide gulf in Indian society. As in the Western world where
people suffer because of their class system, Indian society suffers as a result
of the curses of the caste system. In ancient times that classification helped to
organize society: it was meant to facilitate the distribution of labor and was
based on the principle that one should work according to his ability and
receive according to his need. For example, those in whom rajas was
dominant, who were mesomorphs in body type and given to action, became

the rulers and warriors in society; and those in whom sattva guna was
predominant, who were cerebral and who were interested in understanding,
functioned as teachers and priests. But today there is complete confusion
because the sense of the distribution of labor is lost, and the caste system has
replaced it. Instead of giving people work according to their propensities,
they are placed into rigid categories according to the categories of their
parents, grandparents, and forefathers. Certainly inheritance has an influence,
but unfortunately a serious and rigid division has been created among the
people of India because of the caste system. This fourfold distinction was
originally made by analyzing the qualities and actions of people. It had an
entirely different perspective than the caste system, for its aim was to
integrate the society into one whole. In the Bhagavad Gita this fourfold
division is referred to as brahmana, kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra. The
dispositions, qualities, and actions represented by each of the four groups are
found all over the world in every human society.
We have already explained that no one is the doer of action, that the
three gunas are the real doers of all that occurs in the world. Action is born
out of one’s nature. This means that the gunas are established along with
one’s physical birth. They prompt people to do actions and to perform their
duties accordingly.
One can also put the whole universe into such a fourfold division from
the microcosm to the macrocosm. There are four separate worlds: the worlds
of human beings, animals, plants, and minerals. That differentiation is made
because of the distinct qualities of each. The word “man” has been borrowed
by the English language from its Sanskrit root man, to think, because of
man’s higher thinking capacity. The human being who has developed the
capacities of his mind and controlled his lower nature is primarily influenced
by sattva guna. Animals have no capacity to think as a human being; they can
only sense and react. They are more rajasic and tamasic. The vegetable
kingdom is even more tamasic. The minerals are the most inert and are
dominated by tamas guna.
In modern psychology there has been an ongoing controversy that has
evolved out of German and British philosophy. The controversy is over the
relative importance of that which is inherited versus that which is learned.
German philosophy has emphasized the former, and British philosophy the
latter. Those views have led to two distinct perspectives in modern
psychology, the proponents of which often clash with one another. Yoga

psychology, however, acknowledges the importance of both, but it
understands inheritance in a different way than modern psychology.
According to this view, one inherits not only the characteristics of his parents
and ancestors but inherits those characteristics that he has acquired in a
previous life as well. The characteristics that one brings from his previous life
result from what had been learned through rewards and punishments
experienced by both the individual in his previous life and by his ancient
forefathers. One is born with both what he inherits from previous generations
and what he carries with him as a result of his own previous learning in past
lives.
According to yoga psychology, one’s birth is not an abrupt or capricious
event but a predetermined event that takes place first in the unconscious, in
the realm of desire. One is born in order to fulfill his desires from the past.
The question arises, “Why is one born into a particular family?” The law that
can be applied to answer that question is “similar attracts similar.” Birth into
a particular family is a choice of both the parents and the child. Attachment is
an intense form of desire. If there was attachment in a previous life between
two people, it can cause one’s birth into a particular family. That heredity
influences one cannot be denied, but one’s attachment and desires are also an
inheritance. All the hereditary qualities occur because of the law of
association, attachment. Therefore there is not much difference between
learning and inheritance.
The inevitable law of karma is a continuous chain of cause and effect: an
action is performed and one then reaps the consequences, which lead to ever
more actions, more fruits, and still further actions. A chain of reactions is
thus created. The samskaras or impressions in the unconscious, which are the
results of the deeds performed by a person in his previous lives, are part of
this chain and are responsible for his birth in this life. But the cycle of cause
and effect need not be endless. True learning can completely change and
transform the human being. When one knows how to light the fire of
knowledge and then burns all his samskaras, he can attain freedom. Although
past impressions have a deep impact on the human personality, the right
learning program carried out now and in the future has the power to release
one from previous impacts and can thus lead him to an entirely new
dimension of life in which the past samskaras do not have any influence.

14. Actions do not smear Me nor do I have an attraction toward the fruits
of action. He who recognizes Me thus is not bound by actions.
15. Even the ancient ones who desired liberation performed actions with
this knowledge; therefore you too should perform the same ancient act as
done by your predecessors, the royal sages.
One who has no attachment to the fruits of his actions yet continues
performing actions remains unaffected. That which affects the person is his
attachment to the fruits therein, so the wise give up the fruits and thus attain
freedom. In ancient times the sages knew this principle and attained
liberation, but in today’s world human beings do not understand the profound
philosophy of non-attachment. We see misery everywhere. Because of one’s
attachments to the results of his actions, to the people with whom he lives, to
prestige, and to all sorts of objects, one becomes the slave of his wants and
desires. If modern man learns from the ancient traditions, he will decrease
many of the miseries that he repeatedly creates for himself and others.

16. What is action, what is inaction? Even the wise are confused in this
matter. Therefore I shall teach you concerning action, knowing which you
will be freed from the foul world.
17. One should learn of action; one should learn of action that is
opposed to right action; one should learn of inaction. The reality of action
is deep.

18. He who sees inaction in action and who sees action in inaction, he is
the one endowed with wisdom among human beings. He is joined in yoga, a
performer of complete action.
Even great leaders and heroes sometimes become bewildered in
deciding between right action, action that is opposed to right action, and nonaction. When faced with a decision, how is one to determine which is the best
response? Perhaps the action one chooses will have an effect opposite of
what is anticipated and will create conflict, disharmony, or grief. In that case
is it better not to act at all? Such questions occur to every person many times
each day, although the process of considering these choices is so subtle that
one may not be aware of it. If one does not know what the right action is, his
mind starts pondering over the possible negative consequences of the actions
he is considering. That can result in uncertainty, confusion, and loss of will
power. Indecisiveness, delay in deciding, and the fear of making a decision
are unhealthy and painful. In such cases it is buddhi that needs training. If
one is prone to be hesitant and uncertain in deciding how to act, the decisive
factor of one’s internal organization (buddhi) should be sharpened so that it
can promptly and unhesitatingly advise the mind and enable one to make a
timely decision. Right action, of course, is always best. Action performed in a
state of tranquility with non-attachment is always the right action. Contrary to
that is action committed in a deluded state of mind, but even worse is
inaction. A suspicious, doubtful, and deluded state of mind inevitably leads to
injurious action. Action that is undertaken without taking the counsel of the
decisive faculty of one’s internal state is injurious action.
Many people are overly cautious and afraid of taking action, so they
become inactive. Inaction makes one inert and is worse than wrong action.
During the period of inaction one appears not to be performing actions, but
he is actually reacting adversely to the situation he faces. He is in a sort of
negative withdrawal that leads to slothful ideas: “Why do I need it; why
should I do it; I can live without it; I’m not capable; therefore I should not
even make an effort to do it.”
Inaction is a result of the influence of tamas. In vikarma,* action that is
opposed to right action, rajas and tamas join, but rajas is predominant. Rajas
makes one active, but without sattva one remains deluded. It is actually the
sattva quality that keeps the mind tranquil, and action performed in the state
of tranquility is right action.

One who has disciplined himself, trained his senses, and attained a
concentrated state of mind that always seeks the counsel of buddhi does not
commit mistakes in performing his actions. He surrenders the fruits of his
actions willingly for the sake of others. Such selfless action has two benefits:
the fruits of one’s action do not bind him, and his action becomes a form of
worship, meditation in action. The yogi goes on performing actions with a
tranquil mind and always remains free from the bondage of action. For him
there is no self-interest. All his actions are motivated by selflessness, and he
is free.

19. He whose endeavors are all devoid of desires and attendant volitions,
him the wise call a pandit, with all his actions burned by the fire of
knowledge.
20. Abandoning attachment to the fruits of actions, ever satiated, without
dependency, even though involved in action, he never does anything.
21. Without expectation, his mind and self controlled, ceasing all intake
through the senses, performing the action only physically, he does not
gather sin.
22. Satisfied with gaining whatever comes without seeking, having
transcended all opposites of duality, free of small-mindedness, alike in
accomplishment or failure, such a person is not bound even upon
performing the action.
23. For one whose attachment is gone, who is liberated, whose mind is
established in knowledge, who conducts his action only for sacrifice, his
entire action is dissolved.

Actions performed without the desire for enjoyment are considered to be
pure actions because they arise from knowledge attained in a state of
tranquility. One who has learned the art and science of performing desireless
action and whose motivations are burnt by the fire of knowledge is called a
knower (pandit). Such a wise man remains content and self-reliant. Although
his external behavior may appear to be full of activity, he actually does
nothing, for he is not the doer. This man of self-control, abandoning all desire
for enjoyment and even the means of enjoyment, performs actions merely to
maintain his physical existence. He remains unaffected and uninfluenced by
the actions and the fruits received therein. Thus he never becomes the victim
of emotional outbursts. He has attained freedom.
Actions are thoughts that are externalized, and thoughts are often
controlled by the power of emotion. Emotion has the power to disturb
thought and to distort one’s actions. Vikarma is that action performed under
the influence of unchecked, uncontrolled emotion. There is a vast difference
between emotion and thought. In thought there lingers a doubt, but emotion
does not have the sense of discrimination. Emotion has a great power to
energize a person that thought does not have. Emotion is like a blind man
who has the strength to walk but cannot determine which way to go, whereas
thought is like the man who can see which way to go but is lame. Some
sadhakas use only mental exercises and do not remain aware of the power of
emotion. Others are swayed by emotional power without making use of their
mental abilities. But the skilled sadhaka unites emotional force with mental
power. He brings these together so that they help one another and make the
journey easy. A sadhaka should learn to regulate and use these two distinct
forces, mental and emotional, to enable him to create a strong and dynamic
will power, which will help him in performing actions and duties. It is not
only a tranquil mind and skill that are needed to perform action in a skilled
way, but also a will force that replaces the desire for sense gratification. Will
power is very important in the performance of action as well as in treading
the path of the inward journey. If the mind remains dissipated and
unregulated emotionality persists, the will power is weak. But the more one’s
mind is concentrated, one-pointed, and undisturbed by emotional life, the
stronger will be his will power. Will power is higher than the power of
thought and emotions. With the help of this power, one can do that which is
considered to be impossible.
Among the many potentials one discovers on the inward journey, will

power is the highest of all. Determination, courage, and fearlessness, which
are important to a sadhaka, result from will power. The psychology of the
East is practical, experiential, and applicable, and the path of sadhana, in
which the development of will is the central focus, is unique. Sadhakas who
have mastered this path are rarely seen. In the East, sadhana is more
important than external observations and intellectual conclusions. The study
and development of will power is a practical subject that most thinkers and
intellectuals do not appreciate. In modern psychology and psychotherapy
little attention is given to the development of will power except among the
existentialists and in psychosynthesis. In these two schools (the latter being
derived from yoga psychology), the development of will power is important.
But in most systems of psychotherapy, it is totally neglected. Practical
training in the strengthening of will power should be a part of therapeutic and
self-development programs.
Ordinarily we associate will power with the desire to attain something
worldly. We think of the person with a strong will as aggressive and restless.
But that is a will allied with the ego. Here will power is conjoined with such
qualities as non-attachment to worldly objects, the abandonment of personal
desires, and tranquility. Tranquility is a state of being that is attained by the
disciplined and desire-free mind. One who is non-attached attains the height
of equanimity; he is free from all temptations, charms, desires, and delusions.
Using his powerful will to free himself from attachments and from the allures
of the world, he performs his actions just for the sake of action and is
liberated here and now.
These verses explain a positive way to remove all the errors that one
fears he may commit while performing his actions. They describe a state of
being in which there is inaction in action. Here lies a great secret, and in
knowing that secret, one is free from bondage, even when action has been
performed, as though he had never done the action. The Bhagavad Gita
teaches us a unique way of performing action through love: non-attachment.
Verse 23 again refers to the importance of sacrifice in bringing about
freedom. Sacrifice means giving all the best that one has. The action
performed with the zeal of sacrifice washes off all impurities and errors.
Sacrifice is one of the greatest virtues that one can develop; it totally changes
the course of actions as well as the way one feels when performing actions. It
is as though one consciously becomes the ritual or the archetype and loses his
personal motivation and desire. It virtually consumes one’s personal

motivation and acts of itself, and therefore the fruits are also consumed. The
binding effects of the motivation, of the action, and of the fruits are
completely destroyed. The sacrifices that can lead one to such total
transformation are explained in the following verses.

24. The act of offering is Brahman; the oblation is Brahman; into the
Brahman fire offered by Brahman, it will reach Brahman alone through
the harmony (samadhi) of the actions, which are Brahman.
25. Some yogis gather and sit around the sacrifice offered to gods. Yet
others offer the sacrifice of self by the sacrificial act into the Brahman fire.
26. Others offer the senses, such as that of hearing, into the fires of self-

control. Some others offer objects, such as sound, into the fires of the
senses.
27. Yet others offer all actions of the senses as well as actions of the
pranas into the fire of the yoga of self-control kindled by and blazing with
knowledge.
28. Some sacrifice objects; the sacrifices of some are ascetic practices;
the sacrifice of some is yoga. Some ascetics of well-honed vows perform the
sacrifices of self-study and knowledge.
29. Some others make an offering of prana into apana and offer apana
into prana, seizing the movements of prana and apana, intent on the
practice of pranayama.
30. Others, eating a measured amount of food, make an offering of
pranas into pranas. All of these are experts at sacrifice with their sins
destroyed by sacrifice.
31. Those who eat only the nectar-like amrita, which is the remainder
left after a sacrifice, go to eternal Brahman. Not even this world is availabe
to one who does not perform a sacrifice, let alone the next world, O Best of
the Kurus.
32. Thus many different kinds of sacrifice are spread out before
Brahman; know them all to be products of action. Knowing thus you will
be liberated.
33. Better than the sacrifice in which objects are offered is the sacrifice
of knowledge, O Scorcher of Enemies. All action, O Son of Pritha, reaches
its fulfillment in knowledge.
Sacrifice is an act of offering for the sake of attaining the goal of life:
Brahman. One who performs the sacrifice, the fire that is lit to perform the
sacrifice, the material that is collected for the oblation, the act of offering, and
all the means are verily Brahman. For Brahman is the all-pervading, allencompassing, omnipresent, and omnipotent power. Everything is Brahman.
Brahman is the timeless, infinite, and eternal self-existent power, the
ultimate Truth from which springs the entire universe, which sustains the
universe, and by which the universe is finally dissolved. This self-existent
glory needs no support from any quarter, for Brahman alone exists without a
second. Self and Brahman are two ways of referring to the same allencompassing One. The word Self (Atman) is used with the sense of the
indwelling Lord, and the word Brahman is used without reference to the

individual. The Self is the Lord within, and Brahman is the formless One
beyond all manifestation. Atman in the individual and Brahman in relation to
the universe are one and the same undifferentiated ultimate Reality without a
second. These are two connotations of the only one Reality that exists.
Yogis traditionally use Verse 24 as a prayer before their meals. It
reminds them that eating food is a sort of prayer in itself, that they are eating
for Brahman and not for themselves. Therefore the sadhaka offers his food to
Brahman with the feeling that the food is in fact Brahman, the eater is
Brahman, and the offering is to Brahman alone. That helps the sadhaka
expand his awareness of Brahman. It makes him aware that there is only one
existence and that all separation is illusory. Ordinary people are attached to
food and do not like to offer or share with others. But the sadhaka on the path
of spirituality understands that he should develop the habit of giving so that
he does not become a victim of greed, jealousy, pride, prejudice, or egoism.
Some yogis perform sacrifices internally. Instead of using any external
means, they use their pleasure senses, just as the materials are used in the
external world, to perform the oblation; they use their breath as fire and offer
all their thoughts, emotions, and desires as sacrifices in order to attain selfcontrol. All the motivations arising from the gunas and desires are offered as
oblations into the fire of knowledge. When all the actions, thoughts, desires,
motivations, and gunas are offered as sacrifice in the fire of knowledge, the
yogi is liberated.
There is yet another path. Pranas are aspects of the vital force that
sustains our life on this earth. The word prana means the first unit of energy,
and it also refers to inhalation. In this form of sacrifice, the breath is offered
to the prana within. Thus the fire sustains the fire. By means of this offering,
all impurities are destroyed, and the yogi realizes the highest of truths,
Brahman.
These nine verses explain various kinds of sacrifice and give an overall
view of sacrificial acts and the importance of performing sacrifice. The word
yajna is used to refer to the performance of sacrifice. That act that is
performed for attaining Brahman is one type of yajna. There are Brahma
yajna, jiva atma yajna, jnana yajna, vijnana yajna, and moksha jnana yajna.
In order to simplify these terms, we can put them into four categories: (1)
yajna performed to fulfill mundane desires; (2) yajna performed as a selfless
action to serve and help others; (3) yajna performed to attain freedom from
the bondage of karma or action; and (4) yajna performed by yogis to burn

their samskaras (latent impressions) in the fire of knowledge.
Yajna performed externally is definitely inferior to yajna performed
internally. Internal yajna is a spiritual sadhana called jnana yajna. It leads one
inward to the source of knowledge and consciousness, whereas external yajna
leads to perfection and skillful action and to liberation from the bondage of
action. The wise perform jnana yajna and enjoy eternal peace and bliss. The
universe is also performing yajna. All that we see and experience is yajna.
That is all there is. The difference between the wise and the ignorant is that
the wise person does not resist this grand ceremony, whereas the ignorant
person creates barriers and resistance by performing yajna for sense
gratification and mundane gains.
Brahma yajna is the highest of all yajnas. It is performed with the
motivation to attain ultimate knowledge. Therefore it is not a source of
bondage but a means to liberation. That yajna is performed by the sadhaka
internally without using any externals, and it is performed by others in the
external world. In the external world all actions, expressions, and the best of
materials are put together to light the fire of yajna, and desire becomes the
offering. One receives the fruits of that supreme action. The fruit one receives
from such yajna is that rare skill that allows one to perform selfless actions
that do not create bondage. Both yajnas are performed for attaining Brahman.

34. Learn this by prostrating, by asking questions, and through service.
The wise ones who have seen the Reality will instruct you in this
knowledge,
Verse 34 explains that the preceptor is also a fire into which the
offerings are given. The quality of fire is to transform everything into one
element and to finally reduce the values of the offering to ashes. A good
preceptor or teacher does not put any demands on or require any offering
from the student. The light of the teacher is a self-sustained, eternal light. It is
the light of knowledge. Offering anything to this fire is a gesture of reverence
and love for the teacher, which teaches the student to let go of his greed.
There is a symbolic ceremony performed by spiritual teachers, and
although the outward expression is symbolic of an internal process, the

external expression is of great importance. In the first step of initiation, the
teacher accepts the student and introduces him to the path he has to tread. In
the next step the sadhaka brings dried twigs and offers them to the teacher
who lights the fire and burns them one by one. In this symbolic ceremony
performed between disciple and master, all the disciple’s samskaras are
burned in the fire of knowledge lit by the gurudeva.
The teacher needs nothing, but the way one approaches his teacher is
important for the sadhaka. To receive knowledge it is essential that the
aspirant is humble and that he has one-pointed devotion, love, and reverence.
If these qualities are absent in the student, he cannot receive any knowledge.
When a student asks a question, not in order to test the teacher’s brilliance,
but to know and receive knowledge, it is important for him to be humble. He
should not ask questions for the sake of argument. Egotistical students close
the gates of knowledge. When one is polite and humble, his questions are
answered and his conflicts are resolved.
Verse 34 instructs Arjuna to become humble so that the knowledge is
received by him. In his questioning, he has been fighting with his teacher
instead of fighting the battle. There is still obstinance in his questions. His
resistance toward the selfless teachings is a result of arrogance. Sri Krishna is
teaching Arjuna not to resist but to become humble. Then clarity of mind is
easily attained. This does not contradict previous statements that a student
should question. But one should be humble when he puts questions before his
teacher, and he should receive the answer without resistance.
As has been already noted, resistance is also one of the greatest barriers
to change found in psychotherapy. Therapists find that even though their
clients come seeking guidance and solutions to their problems, and
sometimes pay a great deal of money for the therapist’s guidance, they fail to
carry out the advice or directions received from the therapist. The therapist is
often in a peculiar position: if he gives advice, the client ignores it. Or
realizing that the client will ignore his advice, the therapist can keep his
suggestions to himself, thereby helping the client to sort out his confusion
and conflict and to come to his own conclusions. But then the client feels
cheated and demands that the therapist be more direct in telling him what to
do. Many explanations for this sort of interaction have been offered. Some
therapists call this struggle between therapist and client “the battle for
control,” whereas others attribute it to the client’s defensiveness. One way or
another, it must be dealt with. Therapists have devised various means for

responding to the obstinacy of the client including paradoxical therapy, in
which the client is encouraged to continue or increase his problematic
behavior.
In the beginning of therapy, client and therapist may attempt to
outmaneuver one another, and this may even last throughout the therapy. Is it
any wonder then that psychotherapy lasts so long and has limited results? If
the client comes to therapy with good faith, then rapid and remarkable strides
can be made in self-transformation. But that is the exception rather than the
rule. Progress occurs only to the extent that one goes beyond his resistance,
for resistance is holding onto that which one already is. Unless clients learn
to become humble, straightforward, and receptive in relation to the therapist,
they are not likely to grow. Yet this is rarely achieved in modern therapy, and
much of the therapy is spent directly or indirectly in helping the client to
develop these attitudes.
But the responsibility for lack of receptiveness should not be put entirely
on the client’s shoulders, for how often do we find therapists that are truly
selfless, giving, and knowledgeable? In an atmosphere of arrogance and
selfishness, how can there be a free exchange? Of course, one cannot expect
modern therapists to be as selfless and knowledgeable as Sri Krishna, for they
are still growing and Sri Krishna is fully enlightened. But we can and should
expect them to sincerely work at transforming themselves and to become a
genuine example of that which they are teaching.
The situation in which modern man finds himself is not unique. We see
again and again that the Bhagavad Gita deals with issues similar to those
faced by seekers and clients in the modern world. All the issues of concern to
modern psychology such as motivation, perception, habits, reward and
punishment, and the unconscious are considered in great depth in the
Bhagavad Gita, and theories of these aspects of human functioning are put
forth. But the Bhagavad Gita also goes further than modern therapies: it deals
with those finer aspects of the human being that are almost completely
neglected in modern psychology. The insights and understandings of the
perennial psychology of the Bhagavad Gita can do much to enrich modern
psychology and psychotherapy.

35. Knowing which, you will not again come to such delusion, O
Pandava, and whereby you will see all beings in their entirety in the Self as
well as in Me.
36. Even if you are the most sinful, excelling all the sinful ones, you will
cross this arid ocean with the fleet of knowledge.
37. O Arjuna, as a well-kindled fire turns all kindling into ashes, so the
fire of knowledge turns all acts, even of past lives, into ashes.
Once the aspirant attains unalloyed knowledge, he does not slip back to
his old habits. Such knowledge liberates one from all weaknesses and gives
him freedom from misery. As the fire reduces everything to ashes, so does
knowledge. All impurities are removed by knowledge alone. A student
should learn to enlighten himself by first disciplining himself and following
his sadhana, and then he should learn to expand his consciousness to cosmic
consciousness. Sadhana starts from the individual self, and from the center of
consciousness in the individual, it expands to cosmic consciousness. The
process progresses in stages. First one gains voluntary control in withdrawing
the senses from the objects. Then the mind is made free from the sense
perceptions. Next one encounters thoughts coming from the unconscious.
Then the sadhaka examines and analyzes, and accepts or rejects the
thousands of thoughts that come forth. This state of introspection helps one to
understand his mind because he learns to know which thoughts are useful and
which are not. One then uses the knowledge of discrimination to strengthen
his decisive factor and then learns to judge as a witness. At this stage one no
longer identifies himself with the objects of the world that are stored in the
form of impressions in the unconscious. Now the sadhaka remains vigilant
that he does not become affected by the unknown part of his mind, the
unconscious, and the mind acquires a keen sense of observation and does not
involve itself anymore. This state is like witnessing, and that is why the word
“seer” is used for such sadhakas, because they have attained freedom from
the deep-rooted habit of identification. When one no longer identifies himself

with the objects of the world, he realizes his essential nature. After realizing
one’s own essential nature, he has yet to practice seeing all things in himself
and himself in all things. The state in which one sees himself in all and all in
himself is the true state of Self-realization. It can be attained by the method
already explained or by the method of contemplation. This entire process, this
inward journey, is considered to be the inner way of lighting the fire of
knowledge (antar yoga). Sri Krishna is instructing Arjuna to light the fire of
knowledge which alone has the power of reducing attachment to ashes.
With the help of knowledge even the greatest sinner can cross the mire
of delusion, just as a boat has the capacity to take one to the other shore. By
the fire of knowledge all impurities are burned, all evil thoughts of the mind
are reduced to ashes, and the mind is freed from impurities. With the help of
pure knowledge and true guidance, even a most evil type of person can attain
the goal of life. There are many examples that can be cited from the
scriptures of various traditions: Valmiki in the Indian tradition, Saul in the
Christian tradition, and Milarepa in the Tibetan tradition. Modern students
should therefore understand that there is no point in condemning themselves.
Everyone has the capacity and ability to touch that part of eternity within
himself through which he can attain pure knowledge and transform himself.
Self-transformation finally leads one to Self-realizaton. In that state one can
see himself in all and all in himself.

38. There is no purifier in this world equal to knowledge. One who is
fully accomplished in yoga finds that knowledge in the Self in due time.
39. One who has faith, is intent upon serving the gurus, and has
mastered the senses attains knowledge. Upon attaining knowledge he very
soon reaches supreme tranquility.
40. One without knowledge and without faith, of mind filled with doubt,

perishes. One whose mind is filled with doubt has neither this world nor the
other world nor happiness.
Among all branches of knowledge the highest is spiritual knowledge,
which is attained by the systematic method of the inward journey. The purest
of all knowledge is the knowledge of Atman, the center of consciousness,
which completely quenches the thirst for knowing the truth. When the
sadhaka has firm faith in the inner dweller, Atman, and when he trusts his
teacher and understands the scriptures and teachings of the great ones who
have already trodden the path of light, then he is capable of performing his
duties without committing any error. He does not waste his time uselessly
brooding on concerns that dissipate the mind. Such knowledge purifies the
way to the center of consciousness. Firm faith, a one-pointed mind, control of
the senses, non-attachment, and regular sadhana are important means for
seeing oneself in all and all in oneself. Nothing is higher and purer than the
knowledge of Atman. Such knowledge gives one perfect peace. Then all
doubts are resolved.
In Verse 39, which is very important for all sadhakas, Sri Krishna states
that shraddha, which means single-pointed devotion plus full reverence for
the path that one is treading, is very essential. Control of the senses is also
important. The senses are employed by the mind, and because of the senses,
the mind ordinarily remains dissipated and forms bad habits. Therefore
discipline of the senses is important. With the help of one-pointed devotion
and discipline of the senses, the highest peace is realized.
But he who has no faith, love, or devotion toward the inner dweller—the
controller, the governor, and the fountain of light and life within—and who
doubts the basis of his existence, destroys himself. He can never see the
positive side of his mind. A negative mind full of doubts is neither successful
in the external world nor on the inward journey. When the yogis refer to a
doubtful mind, they mean a mind that is not guided by the higher buddhi. The
mind that is not trained to take counsel from the higher buddhi always
functions with doubts and indecision. Such a mind is unable to attain
anything properly. One who has such a disturbed, distracted mind and who
has no faith in his own resources, has no self-confidence. He does not have
determination or will power. His life is full of misery, sorrow, and grief, and
there is no chance for him to attain happiness. Verse 39 clearly explains that
without love, devotion, and self-control, knowledge cannot be attained. We

have cited examples showing that even evil-minded people who gain
knowledge and faith are capable of attaining the state of tranquility and the
final state of Self-realization. But those whose minds are dissipated, who do
not make any effort to control the senses, and who have no faith in the
existence of the Self or God, are always unhappy and suffer.
Developing the power of concentration by practicing control over the
senses can give one tremendous mental power. Control of the senses and
development of the power of concentration can be attained by anyone. If a
thief and a sadhaka are asked to sit in the same room with a heap of gold and
jewels, the thief will be able to concentrate better than the sadhaka. The
sadhaka must direct his power of concentration toward the attainment of
tranquility and then to Self-realization. Evil is he who has a concentrated
mind but has no faith in the existence of the Self. He is not conscious of the
self-existent Reality within but is conscious only of the objects that give him
pleasure. On the path of spirituality, firm faith becomes a leader, without
which the power of concentration and austerities can mislead one. If a wicked
person learns to develop faith, transformation and Self-realization become
possible to attain.

41. He who has renounced actions through yoga, he whose doubts have
been sundered by knowledge, he who has cultivated the self, him the
actions do not bind, O Conquerer of Wealth.
42. Therefore with the sword of the knowledge of Self, cut this doubt that
is born of ignorance and that is dwelling in your heart. Resort to yoga.
Rise, O Descendant of Bharata!
In these verses the word yoga has been used in the sense of actions
performed skillfully with full mastery for the sake of loka sangraha (actions
done only for the sake of others). Such actions do not bind the yogi. Action
does not enslave anyone; that which has enslaving power is the desire to
receive the fruits of one’s actions. Desire is the cause of enslavement. But for
those who have attained the knowledge of Atman, desires have no existence,

so they are free even though they act.
There are three definite means to attain the highest good. First, when all
aspects of mind start functioning harmoniously, one reaches a state of
tranquility. A harmonious and tranquil mind enables one to perform his duty
without attachment. One can also attain the highest yoga by removal of the
doubtful nature of the mind with the help of pure reason, which has the
qualities of discrimination, judgment, and decision. And the third means is
intuitive knowledge for the realization of Self.
Let us distinguish between buddhi and intuition and their respective
powers. The aspirant whose buddhi is sharpened by the knowledge of
discrimination is skillful in performing action and offers the fruits of his
action for the benefit of others. But one who has acquired profound
knowledge directly from the source of intuition, the purest of all forms of
knowledge, has firm faith in the self-existent Atman.
Manas, the lower mind, functions only in a doubtful manner. It wonders:
Shall I do it or not? Is it good or bad? Is it helpful or not? This particular
faculty of mind is not capable of discriminating, judging, or deciding. That is
why manas is referred to as samkalpa vikalpa atmaka (shall I do it or not?).
But when this faculty receives the profound counseling of the higher buddhi,
it is no longer ruled by doubt, confusion, and conflict. It then acts decisively.
Higher buddhi helps in discriminating and deciding what is right for one
to do, but the knowledge of the pure Self is beyond the sphere of buddhi.
Intuitive knowledge alone gives one the power of Self-realization. Pure
buddhi can penetrate to the deeper levels of one’s being, but the finest and
highest level is attained not through the knowledge of buddhi or through the
mind but through intuitive knowledge alone. Intuitive knowledge does not
dawn bit by bit. It is a spontaneous knowledge received by the sadhaka when
he has surrendered even the way of pure reason.
We disagree with the many writers and commentators who claim that
pure buddhi can be the means of final emancipation because there are, in fact,
two powers that are functioning. One is called the ascending power, and the
pure buddhi leads that ascending power to the summit of human knowledge.
But without meeting the beloved, the descending power, termed kripa or
grace, even reaching the summit does not bring complete fulfillment.
Fulfillment is the unity of the ascending and descending powers. Pure reason
falls within human endeavor, but intuitive knowledge is divine. Intuitive
knowledge is entirely different than the knowledge of pure reason or buddhi.

With pure buddhi one may fathom many finer levels of consciousness, but
without intuitive knowledge one cannot attain the Self-illumined source of
consciousness. That intuitive knowledge dawns when human endeavor is
completed and exhausted.
Intuitive knowledge has immense power to cast off all the fetters of the
sadhaka, for then one’s inner strength is directly obtained from the source of
all strength and knowledge. That source is Atman, the pure Self. As long as
one remains dependent on any other source of strength—wealth, health,
mind, and even buddhi—he remains imperfect. Perfection is attained through
inner strength. There are limitations in all external strengths. If one uses all of
his wealth, all his friends, and those who are intellectually gifted, these will
not help him to attain intuitive knowledge.
In Verse 41, Sri Krishna calls Arjuna the conquerer of wealth, which in
the context of this verse indicates that real wealth and strength lie within,
giving one courage, clarity, fearlessness, and the profound knowledge of
discrimination. The day an aspirant begins looking and finding within, he
begins the process of becoming aware of his inner strength. If he persists on
the path of sadhana, he attains freedom on all levels and finally deserves to
receive the intuitive knowledge through which enlightenment is attained.
Here ends the fourth chapter, in which the knowledge of renouncing
the fruits of actions is described.

Chapter Five
Knowledge of Renunciation and Action

Arjuna said
1. O Krishna, you advise renunciation of actions and again the yoga of
action; whichever is the better one of these two, please tell me definitely.

The Blessed Lord said
2. Both the yoga of renunciation and of action lead to supreme beatitude.
Between those two, however, the yoga of action excels the renunciation of
action.
3. Know him to be ever a renunciate who neither hates nor desires;
devoid of the opposites of duality, indeed, O Mighty-armed One, he is
effortlessly relieved from bondage.
Sri Krishna explained the path of renunciation in the previous chapter,
but further confusion arises in Arjuna’s mind. Most of the time students do
not follow the advice of their teachers because the student’s thinking and

understanding are based on a lower level of consciousness. Because the
teacher speaks from a height that is beyond the student’s level of
comprehension, the student does not understand the teachings.
Communication is thus poor. But teachers persist in instructing their students
and gradually lead them to greater and greater comprehension. Only then can
the higher teachings be received. A profound and great teacher like Sri
Krishna explains the teachings again and again. That is why in the Bhagavad
Gita we find the same teachings explained repeatedly from various angles
and perspectives. The teacher does not tire of teaching, and the genuine
seeker of truth should persist in asking questions until all his doubts are
resolved.
Arjuna wants comprehensive knowledge of each path so he can know
which to follow and how. He asks Sri Krishna to show him the path that will
lead to the highest bliss. Although Sri Krishna imparts the knowledge of both
paths, renunciation and action, he leads Arjuna along the path of action
because Arjuna in his despondency has forgotten his duty and thinks of
turning to renunciation as an escape. In the path of renunciation both action
and fruits are renounced. But in the path of action only the fruits are
renounced, and action is performed with non-attachment. Both the path of
action and the path of renunciation are valid, but Sri Krishna recommends the
path of action for Arjuna for the following reasons: (1) Arjuna is infatuated
and full of grief because of attachment to his relatives; (2) He is in a state of
confusion yet is talking of renunciation, which is merely an escape for him
because he does not have the courage to confront the mental conflict he
experiences; (3) He is being selfish, thinking only about himself and his
position; (4) Thinking of renouncing is a clear sign of cowardice for a
warrior. Refusing to fight a just war and running away from the battlefield
have nothing to do with renunciation. It is quite evident that Arjuna is not
prepared either to perform his duties or to follow the path of renunciation.
We have already explained that the path of renunciation is only for a
fortunate few; the masses are more inclined toward action. The path of action
is thus the only path for the people of the world. In the path of renunciation
both action and fruits are renounced: the fire of knowledge burns all the
actions and the fruits of actions. There is no desire, no action, and therefore
no fruits. The actions that the renunciate performs are not the same actions as
those performed by the people of the world. The actions performed by the
renunciate are preparation for deepening his renunciation so he can attain

profound knowledge. The renunciate’s actions do not lead him toward
worldly attainments but toward the divine.
The student should understand that renunciation is not a path to be
followed by just anyone. Following the path of renunciation is like walking
on the edge of a razor. It needs strong determination, a one-pointed mind, and
complete renunciation of both actions and fruits. It requires immense
courage, non-attachment, and one single desire: to attain liberation. The
reasons that Arjuna gives to Sri Krishna are not the right reasons for
following the path of renunciation.
No aspirant should decide to follow the path of renunciation in a fit of
emotion or if he is not successful in the world. Disappointment and
frustration create the desire for withdrawal and diversion in ordinary minds. It
is a state of confusion—not a preparation for renunciation.
When one genuinely wants to renounce, he has a single desire to attain
liberation. The quality of that desire is not like the quality of other desires
that motivate one to perform actions and reap the fruits. It is a desire for
lighting the fire to burn all the samskaras, all the impressions in the
unconscious. The fire of knowledge alone purifies and makes one free. Then
that desire to attain knowledge is also renounced. The real renunciate is he
who has freed himself from the pairs of opposites such as pleasure and pain,
love and hate, for he remains in the state of bliss by being one with the
Absolute. He has freed himself from the divisions of the phenomenal world.
Arjuna’s path is that of action. That path is valid because: (1) It is the
path of the masses; (2) When one cannot live without doing actions, he can
still discipline himself and practice non-attachment; (3) Deeds performed
with non-attachment are selfless deeds, and selfless deeds lead to
emancipation; (4) Performing deeds with a tranquil mind and with nonattachment is worship, for in this path the fruits of one’s actions are offered to
the Lord.
The aspirant should not forget that here Sri Krishna is not addressing a
group of renunciates. He is addressing mankind through Arjuna, who has to
constantly fight the battle of life by living in the world. Sri Krishna himself is
not a renunciate, and Arjuna is not a renunciate either. Sri Krishna imparts
the knowledge of how to perform skillful and selfless action, and at the same
time he also explains the path of renunciation. He neither condemns the path
of renunciation nor advises all renunciates to change their chosen path and to
follow the path of action. Commentators create a tug of war by identifying

with one path or the other and interpreting the Bhagavad Gita from that point
of view. They are extremists who try to pull others onto their path whether it
is right for them or not. Many commentators unjustly condemn the path of
renunciation without having practical knowledge of that path. Sri Krishna
does not condemn the path of renunciation but recommends that Arjuna and
the ordinary people of the world follow the path of action.

4. Only the childish argue about Samkhya and Yoga as being separate—
not so the pandits. Resorting to either one properly, one attains the fruit of
both.
5. The place that is attained by the followers of Samkhya is also attained
by those of Yoga. He who sees Samkhya and Yoga as one, truly sees.
The great learned ones who understand both the path of Samkhya yoga
(the path of knowledge) and karma yoga (the path of action) do not find a
huge gulf between these two paths, for they know them to be two aspects of
the same pursuit. How can one possibly perform actions without knowledge,
and how can the fire of knowledge be kindled without action? Behind the
yoga of action stands the profound philosophy of Samkhya, and the science
of yoga furnishes the means to practice the goal of life. Thus they are
inseparable. Both paths lead the aspirant to the spiritual summit. Learning to
perform actions is beneficial for the ordinary person, but for one who is free
from the pairs of opposites, it is immaterial whether he follows the path of
renunciation or the path of action. To one who has attained the state of
tranquility, it makes no difference which path he follows. Therefore the
conflict over following one path or the other does not arise in the mind of the
learned. Both paths lead to the same end: liberation, emancipation,
fulfillment, and Self-realization.

6. Renunciation, however, O Mighty-armed One, is difficult to attain
without yoga. The meditator joined in yoga, however, attains Brahman
without delay.
7. Joined in yoga, of purified self, having conquered the self having
conquered the senses, he whose self has become the Self of all beings, is
not defiled even when performing actions.
One should not follow the path of renunciation without first attaining the
profound knowledge of how to perform action. Only the knowledge of
performing action selflessly enables one to follow the path of renunciation.
The path of action is an essential step in renunciation. Confusion comes when
we study two things separately and do not study their relationship.
The path of yoga enables one to attain a state of tranquility without
which no path can be trodden except the path of misery and confusion. If the
path of renunciation is followed without non-attachment, it is based on fake
tyaga (giving up) and leads to misery. The yogi who practices and follows the
path of sadhana understands that direct knowledge arising from practice
alone brings satisfaction.
The great spiritual leaders and sages of every tradition say one and the
same thing. But mere belief in their teachings does not dispel the darkness of
ignorance, for one needs more than belief in the sayings of the sages. He
needs to experience bliss directly. It is necessary for each person to light his
own lamp, to dispel the darkness he himself has created. Though one has the
sun, moon, stars, and all the lights to help him walk, he will stumble if he
does not light the lamp in his inner chamber, for his clouded mind will blind
his vision. Though one may be on a perfect road, the uncertainties created by
his clouded mind will create mirages and hallucinations that mislead him. A
clouded mind leads one to walk in a circle instead of walking forward on the
path that has been trodden by the sages. Inner light is more important than all
of the lights that shine outside.
Only those who have accomplished perfection in action have the
capacity to follow the path of renunciation. Real perfection comes only

through renunciation, and only after attaining perfection in action. Perfection
in action is total giving, completely giving up the fruits of action. Pure and
selfless giving empties one, and then pure knowledge dawns directly from the
source of all knowledge.
In the yoga of action both self-control and purification of the heart are
important. One who has attained control of the senses and mind and at the
same time has purified his heart remains non-attached and performs his
actions in a state of tranquility. The way of the mind is to find solutions
through thinking, reasoning, and philosophizing, but the way of the heart is to
feel and then react emotionally. Emotion has immense power, but it has no
ability to reason. The sadhaka is instructed not to ignore his emotional life,
not to intellectualize but to give attention to the purification of the heart and
also to the control of senses and mind. Purification of the heart means
learning to be sensitive, to understand positive emotion and its use as a means
to attain ecstasy. That attainment is a different experience than the experience
gained by the control of senses and mind. One’s sadhana should be designed
to include both discipline of mind and purity of heart. Those who have
followed such a sadhana and gained the knowledge of the Eternal see
themselves in others and others in themselves—loving all and excluding
none, including all and embracing all. They perform their actions selflessly
while remaining unaffected.

8. ‘I do nothing at all.’ Thus should the knower of Reality, joined in
yoga, contemplate, even while seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating,
walking, sleeping, breathing.
9. Speaking aloud, eliminating, receiving, opening the eyes and closing
the eyes, the knower of Reality holds that ‘the senses are operative in the
realm of the objects of the senses.’
These two verses are intertwined; they complement each other and fulfill
one and the same purpose. The aspirant should gain knowledge and then
practice the application of that knowledge. Practice purifies the ego, which

otherwise forgets its direction and creates a strong fortress by continually
building boundaries around itself. The yogi who has purified his ego acquires
perfect control over the senses. In that case the senses work directly for the
mind, and the mind works in conjunction with buddhi for the pure ego. The
purified ego is able to represent the pure Self called Atman.
That great man who knows the truth and follows the path of nonattached action while performing his mundane duties—seeing, hearing,
sensing, touching, tasting, speaking, being alone, and being with others
during the three states of waking, dreaming, and sleeping—remains
unaffected because he knows that he is not the doer. The senses function, but
the owner of the senses does not become involved. In such a state of mind the
yogi does his actions but remains aware that he is not the doer.

10. Placing his actions in Brahman, abandoning attachment, he who
performs actions is not smeared by sin, any more than a lotus leaf by water.
11. With the body, with the mind, with intelligence, or with senses alone
the yogis perform their actions, abandoning attachment, for the
purification of themselves.
12. Joined in yoga, abandoning the fruits of action, one attains the peace
of those who have conviction. One not joined in yoga, acting out of desire
and attached to fruits becomes bound.
One needs to control the senses and mind and at the same time to have
knowledge of the Ultimate in order to give up attachment. Mere discipline
does not help one to attain the virtue of non-attachment. He alone who gives
up all the fruits of his actions, offering them to the Lord of life and the
universe, is not affected by the evil of attachment. He is like the lotus: though
it lives in the water, its petals remain unaffected by the water. The lotus,
which is a symbol of yoga, reminds us not to be attached while performing

actions.
Many people confuse attachment with love. But in fact it is nonattachment that is love, whereas attachment is merely lust and addiction. If
we learn to practice non-attachment in our relationships, we can create a
heaven for ourselves here. We can live in a garden of delight. if in the close
relationship between husband and wife, both partners learn to see the
presence of divinity in one another and remain conscious of it all the time, the
relationship will turn from lust to love, from attachment to non-attachment.
But if the consciousness of the body remains only on the level of sense
pleasures, lust grows and therefore attachment as well. The spiritualization of
a relationship is possible provided both partners have one and the same aim,
like two wheels of the same chariot, which can make the path easy and
joyful. Any relationship that is worthwhile is an expression of love of the
divine.
Sri Krishna teaches that all actions can be performed as worship,
dedicating the fruits of actions to the Lord. If every action is taken as a
gesture of worship, then how can the fruits of action bind the human being?
Bondage comes from action performed selfishly for the purpose of sense
gratification. Those who have learned the art of dedicating the fruits of their
actions and who remain constantly aware of the Lord of life and of the
universe, though they live in the world they remain unaffected, like the lotus
in water.
Yogis perform their actions selflessly. Their actions are not directed
toward reaping fruits for the sake of pleasure. Such yogis are always in
perennial joy, for they do not create attachment. This path is the path of
selfless love and service. These great lovers of humanity attain the highest
state of peace and tranquility. One who performs his actions with attachment
and with selfish motives does not know how to give and give up and suffers
from the fruits of his actions, which imprison him.

13. Renouncing all actions with the mind, the self-controlled one sits
happily in the city with nine gates; the bodybearer neither doing anything
nor causing anything to be done.

The nine gates referred to in this verse are the nine openings in the body:
two nostrils, two ears, two eyes, the mouth, and the organs of excretion and
generation. It is beautifully said in the Ramayana that these nine gates are
guarded by guards who are so evil that, instead of protecting the city of life,
they always keep these gates open to all pleasurable sensations, for they do
not know any other way. But the yogis, having perfect mastery of the nine
portals or openings in the body, are not trapped by sense gratification. The
yogis control these gates and remain free from the sense pleasures that
gradually destroy the city of life. The master of this city, the Self, is seated in
the inner chamber of our being. Instead of having the profound consciousness
of the master, the ego creates a false sense of individuality and ownership,
and thus serious problems arise.
Because it indulges in sense gratification, the ego forgets the master and
separates itself from the pure Self. This separation is actually the greatest of
all pains for those who have already trodden the path and are conscious of the
Self. The yogi is fully aware that the master of this city of life is the Self, not
the ego. The yogi knows that it is the pleasures obtained from the nine gates
that feed the ego, so he shuts all these gates with his power of discrimination
and self-control. These nine gates then do not remain a source of distraction
and misery. By being aware of the Reality and being free of the problems
created by the ego, the yogi remains non-attached. His happiness is
undisturbed.
In the city of life there are in fact ten portals. Nine are known by
everyone, but the tenth is understood only by yogis. It is called Brahma
randhra (the fontanel or soft spot on the crown of the head), and its function
is only known by accomplished yogis. When the pranas (vital energies)
depart or abandon their duties, the whole city of life crumbles, and a serious
split or division is created. This is the separation that the ordinary man thinks
of as death. Without the bridge that is formed by prana, the two units of life
separate. One unit is the individual self and the unconscious mind; the other
is the conscious mind, senses, and body. This is not actual death; it is only
separation. Those who wait for death to release them from their
circumstances are merely fantasizing about something that never occurs.
They should instead devote their energies to accomplishing their task on this
earth. When one’s vision is limited, the horizon is not seen as it is. Death is a
change and not annihilation. The wise who understand this are never affected
by the horror of death created by ignorant minds. The wise person knows that

he was never born and so he never dies. When a yogi leaves the body, he
opens the tenth gate from which he can visualize the life hereafter. For a yogi
there is no mystery concerning life here and hereafter. As a part of the
eternal, he is never affected by any change, minor or major, even by death,
but he remains in a state of calmness and tranquility. Ordinary minds are not
aware of this tenth portal, for they are in the habit of enjoying the pleasures
received from the other nine portals. They depart from the city of life without
any knowledge of life hereafter. Because of their attachments and their
pleasures they remain miserable here, and they carry their misery with them,
remaining miserable in the hereafter.

14. The Lord produces neither the agency for action nor the actions of
people nor their union with the fruits of action; only nature is thus
operative.
15. The all-pervading One neither takes anyone’s sin nor anyone’s merit.
Knowledge is veiled by ignorance and thereby the creatures are deluded.
16. They who have destroyed that ignorance of theirs through
knowledge, to them the knowledge illuminates that supreme One like the
sun.
17. Their intellect dwelling in Him, the self absorbed in Him, intent upon
Him, totally devoted to Him, their stains washed by knowledge, they no
longer return by way of rebirth.
In Verse 14 the word prabhu is used for the sovereign Self. One who has
attained self-mastery is given this title. Such a master of yoga realizes that the
pure Self has nothing to do with one’s actions, wicked or good. And man is
neither a doer nor is he responsible for anyone else’s actions or for the fruits

of their actions. It is the three qualities of nature—sattva, rajas, and tamas—
joined together that cause action.
Man’s knowledge remains clouded because of ignorance, so he remains
in a state of delusion and confusion and acts from that confused state. Clouds
can temporarily obscure the sun from human vision, but when the clouds are
dispersed by the rays of the sun, the light is seen again. As the clouds
temporarily obstruct the vision, so ignorance obstructs vision of the infinite.
Ignorance is dispelled with the help of sadhana and knowledge.
The real Self has not created anything whatsoever; all manifestation is
because of the gunas. The Self is a master, and the gunas are the
subordinates. Nature functions under the will of the master, the real Self, but
the Self remains aloof. The idea of the creation of the universe by God is
dismissed by one who understands the philosophy of ekoham bahu syam (one
manifested into many). There is no creation, for two cannot exist at the same
time. There is nothing truly independent of the ultimate reality. Those who
believe in duality cannot conceive of the profound truth of oneness without a
second. Only one principle manifests and seems to become many, and that
single splendid glory of one is not dependent upon any other principle.
Dualistic religions assert that one’s sins, errors, and faults can be
removed and purified by the Lord. They follow the system of self-centered
prayer with the belief that their sins will be washed away by the Lord.
Religionists have developed a system of confession that may have a
therapeutic effect, but it does not remove the clouds of the mind. The belief in
sin leads one to guilt feelings, and a guilty mind experiences depression and
self-condemnation. All human beings suffer from guilt in various degrees.
Guilt is a sort of repentance that occurs after one has already done something
that he believes is bad. Becoming preoccupied with guilt and remorse merely
compounds the problem, and asking for forgiveness may lead one to feel
better, but what is really needed is a change in one’s way of being so that he
does not commit the same mistake again. Prayer that makes one aware of the
source of strength within is helpful, but most of all one needs the will power
to behave differently. When one has will power and is determined to apply all
human endeavor to a new way of being, then the inner strength attained
through prayer helps. A human being has free will but only fifty percent. The
other fifty percent can be attained with the realization that the real source of
strength lies in the depths of one’s being. Mere confessions to priests or
talking with friends does release one from the burden of guilt but does not

keep one from repeating the action. Self-control and prayer that makes one
aware of the source of strength within should both be applied at the same
time. How can God possibly take responsibility for human errors and sins?
That is a philosophy of the ignorant. People become irresponsible and do not
pay attention to their duties and then claim that by visiting churches, temples,
shrines, and sacred places their sins will be washed away. That is a
consolation and a therapeutic solace but not a permanent remedy.
On the path of sadhana the yogi learns to understand that it is his past
samskaras with their powerful motivations that force him to do that which he
knows should not be done. Therefore it is necessary to have self-control
along with knowledge. Many students equate self-control with repression, but
that is not correct. All repressions and suppressions—evident, hidden, or
latent—are brought forward consciously and burned in the fire of knowledge.
Self-control is a conscious act deliberately performed to free one from
repression and suppression. Through sadhana alone the yogi is able to light
the fire of knowledge and to burn all his samskaras. At that stage he realizes
that it is not the Self but the gunas that create delusion.
Those who find joy in practicing sadhana for the attainment of the Self
become one with the Absolute. That is the highest state of sadhana. Those
who are intellectuals but do not practice and experience directly never
comprehend that state. The state of oneness is not at all the subject matter for
debate and discussion; it is the profound experience of direct knowledge that
can be comprehended only by those who are on the path of sadhana. Those
who are following the path of sadhana with firm determination become free
from samskaras. Their fetters are broken, and they attain that oneness and
become free from the rounds of births and deaths.
Birth and death are two major changes experienced in human life, and
one experiences these two events many times. A human being is born, he
grows from infancy to childhood, childhood into adolescence, adolescence
into adulthood, adulthood into middle age, and middle age into old age. Is it
thus not true that we have died and been reborn many times in one lifetime?
Then why does the horror of death mar the joys of the present? Only the
ignorant are afraid and affected by what they imagine death to be. Death is
essential in the process of growth. But the Self-realized are free, for all the
mysteries of death and birth are already revealed to them. They are not only
free from the fear of death but are free from the rounds of deaths and births.

18. Toward a philosopher endowed with knowledge and discipline,
toward a cow, toward an elephant, and toward a dog as well as toward a
cremation ground attendant, the wise are of a single eye.
19. They whose minds are established in equanimity have conquered the
entire creation right here. Brahman is faultless and even; therefore they
are established in Brahman.
One who has attained the profound knowledge of Atman and sees the
real Self as the Self of all is called a brahmana. A brahmana, enriched with
the knowledge of Atman, is always modest and humble. Such a learned one
who is devoted to acquiring knowledge of the Ultimate is also called a pandit,
and he attains samatvam (evenness). He conquers the fear of death and is free
from the bondage of birth and death. The real Self is free of attributes of all
kinds. Those who realize the Self everywhere are absorbed in the Self. Just as
the stream meets the ocean, becomes one with it, and can no longer be
separated from it, the brahmana is no longer separated after becoming one
with the Self of all.
The ordinary human being remains polluted by the sense of distinction.
He thinks one person is good and another is bad; one attractive and another
ugly; one rich and another poor. He reacts to such distinctions with either
attraction or aversion. But the learned and realized one sees everyone alike.
He is not affected by these distinctions, for he sees the Absolute smiling
through all faces. Those learned ones behave with kindness and gentleness to
all creatures. They love all and exclude none. The question might arise: how
is it possible for anyone to treat a human being, dog, cow, rat, and ant
equally? When one can easily discover differences in the characteristics of all
creatures, how is it possible to treat all of them alike? A learned man knows
the distinctions between creatures; he does not approach a dog for the sake of
milk. But he acknowledges the real Self in both and admires each in its
respective place. He knows that gold jewelry is fashioned into a variety of
ornaments but that all of those ornaments are made of one and the same

element: gold. He also has the knowledge to use the ornaments in the way
that they should be used.
The ignorant do not have profound knowledge of birth and death. The
secret of these two events is known only by the learned. They have already
solved the riddles of these two occurrences, for past, present, and future are
equally comprehended by them. They also have knowledge of the hereafter.
For those who have attained Brahman, Brahman’s knowledge is ever present.

20. One should not be exhilarated upon attaining something pleasant nor
should he tremble over attaining the unpleasant. A person of steady
wisdom, entirely free of confusion, knowing Brahman, dwells in Brahman.
21. The happiness that he finds in the Self, whose self is unattached to
external contacts, he with his self joined in the yoga of Brahman attains
imperishable comfort.
Those even-minded great men are neither excited by nor proud of their
achievements, nor do they become disappointed or disgusted with that which
is unpleasant. Their buddhi is firmly established in Brahman, and the knower
of Brahman never becomes deluded. Those who are not attached to the
objects of enjoyment experience everlasting happiness within themselves.
Evenness leads such great ones to the attainment of perfection. They are
revered by all.
This is an important lesson for all aspirants: one should not become
overwhelmed by his attainments and should also not be affected by
disagreeable situations. In all circumstances the great ones maintain their
evenness. They do not lose their serenity, and they are not subject to the
temptations and charms of the mundane world. Their tranquility comes with
non-attachment; their peace and serenity remain undisturbed. Being one with
Brahman, they remain in a state of joy everlasting yet ever changing.
Ordinarily people become imbalanced when they experience both
success and failure. In success one becomes inflated with pride and thinks too
much of himself, and in failure he becomes deflated and depressed. When

one becomes inflated he sets himself for a fall, for he then creates a false
impression of his worth, and the course of events established by his own
unconscious is bound to bring him down. Similarly the depressed state is a
deluded state in which one falsely identifies with his failure or supposed
inadequacy. Although one may hold on to either state for some time, his own
internal learning process will tend to eventually bring him to a state of
balance. The wise man, however, avoids such swings of emotion; he has
learned to balance his emotions and maintains that balance all the time. A
tranquil mind is never deluded by these illusory events, whereas the mind of
the ignorant is easily swayed by pain and pleasure.
Ordinary people find happiness only after obtaining the pleasurable
objects of their desire, but those who are Self-realized experience the flow of
perennial joy. The great yogis experience the happiness of perennial joy
without interruption in the waking, dreaming, and sleeping states. The
fountain of joy is within and can never be experienced if it is not realized
within. As long as one finds delight in the temporary enjoyments of the
world, perennial joy cannot be experienced. The desire to obtain joy through
external experiences is always in vain.
Those who have intense thirst for knowledge cannot quench that thirst
with the waters of streams and wells: only the knowledge of the Eternal
quenches it. When in a systematic manner the aspirant practices inwardness,
he learns to stop the outward flow, to experience the joy of the Eternal. He is
constantly aware of that joy. Through yogic sadhana the yogi is able to reach
a state of equilibrium, evenness, and tranquility. For him external pleasures
do not have value, and he does not search for happiness in the external world.
He knows that the source of happiness is within. He constantly remains aware
of this truth, undisturbed and united with the Eternal.

22. The pleasures that arise through contact are causes of sorrow alone;
they have a beginning and an end, O Son of Kunti. A wise man is not
delighted in them.
23. He who before leaving this body, right here, can learn to withstand

the impetus rising from desire and action, he is joined in yoga. That man is
happy.
When an aspirant develops an awareness of and constantly feels the
presence of Brahman, the state of uninterrupted happiness is experienced.
Even when performing his duty, he maintains consciousness of the Eternal.
Contact with the objects of the world gives one only limited and
momentary pleasure. The senses, trying to obtain boundless and imperishable
pleasures, cannot succeed because the senses are limited, and the objects that
give pleasure are not permanent. Pleasures last only for a short time. They are
transitory in nature, and in between them one experiences many unpleasant
states. The absence of the object of pleasure leads to anger, grief, depression,
or anxiety. One becomes fearful of losing or not attaining the desired object
and becomes envious or jealous of others’ attainments. All of these
unpleasant emotions arise from the search for sensory pleasure. Sensory
pleasure is not capable of quenching one’s thirst. The thirst of the human
being can only be quenched by everlasting happiness.
Before his body stops functioning, a sadhaka attains a tranquil state of
mind that prepares him for the transition that remains unknown to the
ordinary human being. For ordinary people life hereafter is an unknown
phenomenon, but it is not like that for the yogi or sadhaka. For the knowers
of truth, existence on this earth is understood as preparation for the voyage to
the unknown. They have already acquired the knowledge of that voyage in
this lifetime, and they accomplish what is to be accomplished in this lifetime
before the body falls apart. They do not postpone the real issue of life; rather
they learn to postpone and even abandon the pleasures of the world for the
highest happiness. They have the capacity to give up what is in the hand in
order to attain that which is not experienced as yet but which will be fulfilling
and satisfying. That is everyone’s right: to attain the highest happiness,
unalloyed knowledge, undisturbed peace, and tranquility.
The wise make all sincere efforts to attain happiness here and now. And
many are successful in realizing the truth and in finding happiness before
they leave their bodies. Such great men do not take off their garment, the
physical body, in a helpless state as ordinary people do. They leave it
consciously. They are free here and remain free wherever they go.
If one is not free from the desires of the mundane world and from the
anger that results from unfulfilled desire, he is miserable here and will be

miserable after leaving his body as well. Therefore from the viewpoint of
sadhana, it is the first and foremost duty of the sadhaka to strengthen his
determination and devotion by building strong will power so that he does not
allow his energy to be consumed by the trifles and pleasures of the mundane
world. He knows that there is something higher that awaits him with allembracing arms, with that rare love that gives one permanent happiness and
everlasting joy. The great man does not postpone the task of attaining the
state of non-attachment until the next life, but he accomplishes it in this
lifetime. The so-called pangs of death that horrify and frighten the ordinary
human being do not affect the great man because there is no attachment to the
body.

24. He who finds comfort within himself, who finds zest and delight
within himself, and whose light is within himself such a yogi, having
become Brahman, attains absorption into Brahman.
25. The sages, with their stains dissolved, attain absorption into
Brahman; their doubts sundered, their selves controlled, they delight in
benefitting all beings.
26. A bsorption into Brahman is close to those ascetics whose minds are
controlled, who are devoid of desire and anger, and who have come to
know the Self.
Seeking happiness in the external world is like chasing a mirage: no
matter how fast one may rush toward it, he never finds anything even when
he reaches the place where he thought his goal lay. It is impossible to attain
happiness in the external world, for happiness is only found deep in the
innermost chamber of one’s being. The Self is the center of happiness. Those
who are realized are always filled with the happiness of the Self, and they
alone find real peace in their hearts. With the light of knowledge, such
illumined beings are able to remove all doubts from the mind. When the

doubts are removed there is clarity of mind, and then one is able to see things
as they are. This happens only when the knowledge of Atman is attained.
That knowledge is all-encompassing, eternal, and everlasting. But those who
become a victim of sense pleasures have no clarity of mind, are full of
doubts, and are unable to see things in perspective. Their sufferings are
countless, and they constantly create obstacles for themselves instead of
removing them.
According to the message of the Bhagavad Gita, Brahmanirvana
(absorption in Brahman) is a state of highest bliss. That blissful state is
attained by those great ones who have sense control and whose doubts have
been removed by the knowledge of discrimination. Such great ones live on
the earth, serving all creatures selflessly. Those who have purified their hearts
and minds, removing desire and anger, and who have perfect control over
their minds find peace within and without.
Those who dedicate their lives to the service of mankind do not have
selfish motivations and desires. It is easy for them to have control over their
desires and anger, whereas selfish people have no self-control. They are
uncontrolled, full of desire, and remain under the grip of anger. Anger is an
outcome of unfulfilled desire. It is an evil that shatters the nervous system by
imbalancing the body, breath, and mind. Those who are out to fulfill their
selfish desires can never be happy, for such desire if fulfilled gives birth to
many more desires and finally creates a whirlpool that makes one miserable.
But those who are conscious of Brahman and find delight in having control
over their minds are the great ones, enjoying peace within from the perennial
source of peace and happiness, the Self.

27. Keeping all external contacts out, and fixing the gaze between the
brows, making prana and apana even-flowing between the nostrils,
28. The meditator (muni) whose senses, mind, and intellect are well

controlled, who is intent upon liberation, who is devoid of desire, fear, and
anger—he is indeed always free.
29. One attains peace upon knowing Me, the receiver of all sacrificial
and ascetic observances, the great sovereign of all the world, and the friend
of all beings.
This passage explains a practical method of sadhana that helps one to
attain a concentrated mind and then leads him to a higher step of onepointedness. When the aspirant learns to be still, keeping his head, neck, and
trunk straight in a comfortable and steady pose such as sukhasana (the easy
pose) or siddhasana (the accomplished pose), and when he practices the same
posture every day, the disturbances that arise from the body, such as tremors,
twitches, shaking, and jerking, are tamed and brought under control.
Verse 27 states that the gaze should be fixed between the two eyebrows.
This has two meanings. One is the practice of trataka (external gaze), which
leads to some concentration of the mind but is primarily practiced to attain
good eyesight. The other meaning is to concentrate the mind on the space
between the eyebrows to gain control of the mind to the extent that is needed
to achieve one-pointedness of mind and to turn it inward. There are numerous
misunderstandings and misleading commentaries on this verse. Concentration
on ajna chakra, a main center of focus during meditation, should be practiced
internally and not externally. It is ludicrous for commentators to say that the
eyeballs should be pushed upward and the gaze placed between the two
eyebrows. If one does that, he will have a headache and will never want to do
it again. Do not practice the gaze between the two eyebrows thinking that that
is a form of meditation.
The second line of Verse 27 clarifies the practice but can be understood
only by sadhakas, not by intellectuals. By focusing the mind on the space
between the two nostrils, one increases the awareness of both breaths—
inhalation and exhalation (prana and apana). Breath awareness and focusing
the mind on the point between the two nostrils help the sadhaka to attain a
state of sushumna, without which meditation on the ajna chakra between the
two eyebrows is difficult. Other scriptures describe the two points—the tip of
the nose and the space between the eyebrows—as practices of trataka
(external gaze), but such practices of trataka are not related to the state of
equilibrium between inhalation and exhalation. When both nostrils begin
flowing freely instead of the breath flowing more predominantly through one

nostril, and when prana and apana (the incoming and outgoing breaths) are
equal, that is called the activation of sushumna. The two breaths are then in
complete equilibrium with neither predominating. Without such equilibrium,
sushumna cannot be active. Those who are on the path of sadhana and
meditation should understand that without the application of sushumna, it is
not possible to have control over the mind and its modifications. No matter
how much one boasts about his methods of meditation, the practice is
incomplete and the method is wrong if sushumna is not applied. The moment
sushumna is applied, the mind experiences that state of joy that is quite
different from the experience of any other joys in the world. During that time
one has no desire to obtain the pleasures of the external world because the
mind is in an elevated state of joy that is higher than any pleasure gained
from the external world.
When concentration is strengthened and the mind is not allowed to use
its usual channels (the senses), it spontaneously begins to attain onepointedness, which is a step beyond concentration. When one-pointedness of
mind is attained and the mind is not allowed to go to the external world, it
finds its way inward. That is the first step of meditation. When the sadhaka or
yogi attains that state, he acquires direct control of the mind. Such a mind is
free from fear and anger and finds liberation from the bondage arising from
enslavement by sense pleasures. However, that liberation is not final
liberation, for the one-pointed and inward mind has yet to light the fire of
knowledge, in which all samskaras are burned. When that occurs a higher
state of liberation is attained, but the final liberation is higher yet. That final
liberation takes place when the jiva (individual self) unites itself with the pure
Self, which is the Self of all, exactly as a drop of water unites with and
becomes one with the ocean.
Verses 27 and 28 gave a brief account of the sadhana that brings
freedom from the senses and sense pleasures and leads to control of the mind.
Having control over the mind, one is able to control desire and anger. When
meditation is deep and samadhi is experienced, liberation is finally attained.
The liberated soul dedicates all of the fruits of his actions to the Lord alone,
who is in everyone and who is everywhere. With this dedication he does not
slip back to the consciousness of his own individuality.
Here ends the fifth chapter, in which Sri Krishna leads Arjuna on the

path of action, which leads one to develop perfect control over his
mind and to abandon all desires and anger, thus attaining liberation.

Chapter Six
The Path of Meditation

The Blessed Lord said
1. Without resorting to the fruit of action, he who performs the action
that needs to be done, he is a renunciate and a yogi, and not one who has
renounced ritual fires nor one who is actionless.
2. That which is called renunciation you should know that to be yoga, O
Pandava. No one who has not renounced desires can become a yogi.
The previous chapter teaches that renouncing desire for worldly pleasure
and gain helps one to attain control over the mind. By giving up desires and
gaining control over the mind, one can attain liberation. The highest
liberation is attained only with Self-realization. In the first and second verses
of this chapter, Sri Krishna says that sannyasa (renunciation) and karma yoga
(the path of action) share certain requisites: performing one’s own duty
without any desire for the fruits, controlling the senses and the mind, and
attaining a state of tranquility.
Now let us describe these two paths without considering one to be
superior and one inferior and find out how they are distinct. In the path of
renunciation, renouncing the fruits of actions comes later. First comes tyaga,
literally abandoning all of one’s personal possessions. Three main desires
called three eshanas are renounced: the desire for a spouse and children, for

wealth, and for name and fame. Along with this the practice of nonattachment (vairagya) is also strengthened, without which renunciation
cannot be accomplished. It is said that a bird having two wings, tyaga and
vairagya, is able to soar from this shore of life to the shore of eternity. The
renunciate who is firmly established in the art of non-attachment and who has
nothing of his own is a true renunciate. Such a renunciate is rare and is
always revered because it is not easy to renounce the world of mine and
thine. This path is for the fortunate few and not for the ordinary masses. It is
called sannyasa yoga or jnana yoga.
The other path is the path of action. In that path one can have a wife,
children, a home, and other means for living in the world, but non-attachment
is strictly followed. In the path of action there is an important question to be
considered: is it possible for the yogis who follow the path of action to
perform actions in such a way that they do not create barriers and obstacles;
can action become the means of liberation and lead one to Self-realization,
the goal of human life? There are two main responses. First, good actions
performed selflessly and with the fruits given as offerings to the Lord who is
in everyone have no binding power. Selfless service is important. Second,
good actions also bring good fruits, and those fruits can be utilized merely to
enable one to live in the world so that he can discharge his duties effectively.
No matter which path one follows, he has to do actions; he cannot live
without acting. Therefore it is important to understand the nature of an action
before one performs that action—whether he is doing sattvic action with selfmastery or is being controlled by rajasic or tamasic qualities and acting as a
slave to those qualities. Sattvic actions alone lead one to the state of
tranquility. Sattvic actions performed without the desire for fruits are
considered to be liberating actions. All other actions bind the human being.
Yogis who wish to attain the state of tranquility do their actions and duties
selflessly and skillfully. They have all the necessary objects of the world but
use them just for the sake of doing their duties.
Many students wonder how it is possible for anyone to realize the pure
Self while doing his duties, for the renunciates say that without complete
renunciation Self-realization is not possible. Renunciates also do their duties
but only for Self-realization. They do not believe in doing actions for the
people of the world. Renunciation is an inward journey, whereas the path of
action is external, though the aim of both paths is one and the same. In the
path of action there are allurements, charms, and temptations. In the path of

renunciation, it is the samskaras (latent impressions) that are not yet dealt
with that are the obstacles. Samskaras have a deep impact on human life.
Because of their samskaras, yogis on the path of action are often led to do
something that is not to be done. Therefore purification of mind, action, and
speech must be constantly practiced in both paths. These two paths have one
and the same goal, though they seem to be distinct. Neither should be
considered superior or inferior.
In practicality the real yogis and sannyasins are one and the same. On
both the paths of action and renunciation, the key point is renouncing the
fruits of actions. Those who have renounced the path of action but still lust
for the fruits of action are not true renunciates. In the path of renunciation no
external sacred fire is lit, and no sacrifice is offered to the fire. Rather,
renunciates light the fire of knowledge and burn their samskaras. The path of
renunciation is also referred to as yoga, for in the path of renunciation
anything and everything is renounced but not the purpose, which is union of
the individual self with the Self of all. That union is attained by the
renunciate through meditation and contemplation. In the path of action one
can attain that union by giving up all the fruits of actions and remaining
completely non-attached.

3. For a meditator (muni) desirous of ascending in yoga, action is said to
be a supportive means. And when the same one has already risen in yoga,
tranquility becomes his support.
4. When he is no longer drawn to the objects of senses nor to actions,
having renounced all volitions of desire, he is then called ‘one who has
ascended to yoga.’
One who wants to have perfect control over the mind and its
modifications should master his internal states. It is only possible for one to
attain that control when he learns to practice in silence. A muni is one who
practices mauna (silence) in order to attain perfect silence. When the muni
makes efforts to achieve profound control over mind, action, and speech and

maintains perfect silence, he attains the state of tranquility. Until one
experiences perfect silence, he is not aware of the profound difference
between leading a life in the external world and treading the path of the
inward journey.
Silence is not understood by most people and is experienced by only a
few mendicants, for unless one fathoms the deepest state of silence, silence is
only a word, and one does not comprehend its meaning. Every human being
wants to be in silence for some time. We often hear a mother saying to her
children, “Will you please be quiet?” She asks the children to be quiet so that
she is not disturbed, but her desire is for more than external quietness: it is a
desire to go to a deeper state of silence. Consciously or unconsciously,
everyone desires to go to the deep state of silence, which is restful and
refreshing and opens the gates of new dimensions of life. Often silence
answers the questions that are not answered in any other way or by any other
means.
The systematic method that leads one to the deepest state of silence is
called meditation. Sleep is very necessary for all creatures of the world in
order to have physical and mental rest, but the rest acquired through
meditation is far superior to the rest given by sleep. There is a difference
between sleep and the deep state of silence. The ignorant person sleeps every
day and comes out of sleep no less ignorant because sleep offers only rest.
But if one learns to go to a deep state of meditation, he is rested and at the
same time his whole personality is transformed. That transformation cannot
be attained without the inward method of meditation. Through meditation the
mind attains a state of tranquility.
Meditation leads to mastery of the mind, and with that mastery, one
attains quietude. Such a tranquil and equable mind, having no desire for sense
pleasures, also has mastery in the performance of actions. Those who have
gone beyond the jabberings of the mind, (samkalpa and vikalpa) attain the
highest state of yoga.
Those who are not meditators experience only the known level of life.
But with the help of meditation, one can have profound knowledge of all the
subtle states within and ultimately attain the deep state of silence. Such an
aspirant alone can experience both the known and unknown levels of life.
The human being is a citizen of the inner world: he is an inner dweller first
and a denizen of the external world afterwards. But ordinary people remain
citizens of the external world and aliens to the internal world.

The yogi and sage remains aware that he is an inner dweller always.
Once, for example, when our master was sitting quietly and calmly, a prince
came to visit and said to him, “Sir, you seem to be lonesome.” The master
replied, “Because you have come! I have been enjoying in deep silence the
conversation with my friend within. Now you have come and therefore I have
become lonesome."
It is true that students, friends, and loved ones can make us lonesome.
One should learn to establish friendship with the eternal friend within. Then
he will never be lonely. Real meditators are never lonely, so those who do not
want to be lonely should learn to meditate and go on doing meditation until
they meet their beloved eternal friend who is seated in the silent chamber in
everyone’s being. Loneliness vanishes forever in that state of silence where
the true friend resides. Loneliness and silence are two entirely different states
of mind. In silence one has company, but in loneliness one is all alone. The
yogis learn to attain that state of silence, and then they are able to realize
directly the nature of both the external and internal worlds. Those yogis can
observe both within and without from the height of tranquility.
The ancient yogis found that loneliness is the greatest of all diseases and
that it has no remedy but to go to the deep state of silence where the eternal
beloved is seated with long and tender arms to embrace one. That is the only
therapy that removes loneliness. All company and associations in the external
world eventually lead to separation and then to loneliness. But if one
becomes aware of the eternal friend, he can efficiently play his role in the
grand drama of life and will never become lonely. This knowledge is
essential to remove the ignorance of loneliness. Then it does not matter which
path one follows or to which end of the earth he travels. Going to the deepest
state of silence with the help of a systematized and organized method of
meditation is the highest of all therapies, but modern therapists have not yet
understood the importance of meditative therapy. Modern therapy provides
only one aspect of therapy: it allows the patient to let out his repressions and
suppressions through speech and action. The patient receives a little solace,
but he does not attain the control necessary to prevent him from becoming a
victim of disturbances. Most therapists are afraid of introducing meditational
therapy because of lack of practical knowledge and fear of the unknown.
However, many beneficial results can be obtained by introducing
preliminaries, such as stillness of the body and evenness of the breath, which
have proven very helpful to those who are emotionally imbalanced. If such

practices are introduced in a gentle and systematic manner, many
psychosomatic illnesses can be eliminated.
What is the way for the people of the world who do not have much time
for meditation and do not know the right method of meditation? The answer
is to practice meditation in action as the Bhagavad Gita teaches. Be conscious
of the Truth, the center of consciousness, and perform your actions selflessly
with non-attachment. No matter where you are—in your office, in the
kitchen, in the shopping center, or in the midst of a crowd—meditation in
action can be practiced. Learn not to forget the center of consciousness within
you. Do not allow your mind to be scattered, and whatever you do, do it with
full attention. Beneath all your deeds there should be awareness of the center
of consciousness within. If one thinks he is fit, he should practice meditation
in silence. Otherwise meditation in action is the message of the Bhagavad
Gita, without which the path of action is difficult to tread.

5. One should cause the deliverance of the self by the Self. One should
not make the self sink. Self alone is the kinsman of the self; self alone is the
enemy of the Self.
6. Self is the kinsman of his self by whom the self is conquered by the
Self. In the apparent enmity from non-self, the Self alone is operating like
an enemy.
When the aspirant realizes that he is competent and resourceful, he gains
confidence and begins following the inner path. Dependency on external
resources cannot help him to tread that path. Having deep-rooted habits of
depending on external resources leads the student again and again to search
outside of himself. He thinks that visiting one shrine and then another and
going from one teacher to another will help him, but the inner thirst remains
unquenched. As long as one continues to seek the means and objects that give
happiness in the external world, he does not find true happiness. So first of all
a student should be led to realize that he already has all the means to tread the
path of inner light and that external crutches cannot fulfill and satisfy his

desire. Searching in the external world is in vain: seeking within is the only
way. With firm determination one must use his will power to apply all the
means that are at his disposal. One may strongly desire unfoldment and
enlightenment, but as long as he does not find the right way and does not
commit himself to a reliable and valid method of sadhana, he will be wasting
his energy and might even meet disappointments that could kill his desire to
continue seeking.
When one gets into his inner world, he gradually realizes that that which
he was seeking outside is actually within. He comes to understand that he is
fully equipped and has all the means at his disposal to attain Truth. Then he is
on the path of inner light and knows that for attaining the Self, the Self alone
is needed. Self is attained by the Self. And one’s own resources are the only
means for attainment. Treading the path of inner light is one of the greatest
experiments that can be made by a human being.
Darkness prevails in the external world when the sun is obscured. But if
someone is with the sun all the time, he will never encounter darkness. In the
inner world the guiding light is always there, and one is never alone. But in
the external world one has to depend on resources that are not always at his
disposal and on the instructions of teachers and knowledge given by the
scriptures. After one has examined the external resources and knows their
limitations, he turns within. That is one of the brightest days in one’s life. He
is still a seeker, but he is no longer seeking in the external world. He has
begun seeking within.
One encounters many inexplicable phenomena in the internal world. He
may be bewildered and overwhelmed for some time, unable to accept and
adjust to the subtle experiences. But when he pursues his sadhana he learns to
differentiate between two types of experiences: some are negative and some
positive, some are helpful and others unhelpful, some are misleading and
others leading. One learns to reject those experiences that are not helpful and
to accept those that are helpful in order to march toward deeper states of
being. If he has patience, tolerance, and reliance on his inner strength, he
pursues his sadhana with full determination and learns to discriminate and
choose that which is helpful from that which is not. As one explores the inner
world, there can be great confusion at times. But with the help of sadhana and
the guiding light within, one attains clarity of mind and crosses safely over all
obstacles. He follows the eternal light within, and that light leads him to its
source: the pure Self. He, the seeker; light, the means—he is led to the

kingdom of happiness, the pure Self. Thus a seeker elevates himself by the
Self.
A seeker should never allow himself to slip back to the grooves of his
past habits. The Self indeed is a real friend. If the seeker does not use his
resources within but instead remains dependent on external resources, he
becomes his own enemy. You are your own friend and your own enemy. He
who has conquered his lower self through the guidance of his inner Self is a
friend to himself; but one who has not been able to conquer his lower self is
his own enemy. For conquering the lower self, self-control is needed. Selfcontrol is indeed a friend, and without it the scattered forces of the mind
create obstacles. A man of self-control and a man without self-control are like
friend and foe respectively.
Students often project their incompetencies onto others and then blame
them for their own inadequacies. That is an easy means of escape. No one
wants to accept responsibility for his weaknesses and mistakes. But when the
student becomes aware that he is his own friend and also his own enemy,
then dawns the light of discriminative knowledge. That is another higher step
attained in the path of Self-realization.
The student who does not have knowledge of the scriptures and has not
been taught by a competent teacher is confused in discriminating between the
real Self (Atman) and the lower self, which is a constituent of primordial
nature, Prakriti. The lower self is called the mere self. The mere self is
comprised of the body, senses, breath, conscious mind, and unconscious
mind, which constantly undergo change. It is called the mere self or lower
self because of its ever-changing nature. Behind the lower self shines the
light of the Eternal. The pure Self is never born, so it never dies: it is
everlasting and unchanging. One should learn to distinguish the lower self
from the higher Self, for then one can learn to identify himself with the real
Self instead of with the mere self.

7. The supreme Self of one pacified and self-conquered is harmonized in
cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as well as in honor and dishonor.
8. His self satiated by knowledge and realization, absolute, having
conquered the senses, joined in yoga, he is called a yogi, beholding a lump
of clay, stone, or nugget of gold alike.
9. One is distinguished who holds the same view toward an affectionate
friend, an enemy, a stranger, a neutral person, one hated, a kinsman,
toward the saintly as well as the sinful.
One who has successfully conquered this lower self with all its desires
and appetites attains the highest state of uninterrupted peace, and he is above
the influences of the pairs of opposites such as pain and pleasure, heat and
cold. Such a great one is made fully content by the wisdom gained through
yogic sadhana. One who is firmly established in the constant awareness of
Atman (the pure Self) is aware of the limited value of the mundane world, its
objects and sense pleasures. He is no longer enticed by the pairs of opposites.
For him a piece of rock and a heap of gold are alike. Such a yogi has attained
perfection.
One who has conquered the appetites of the lower self is called jitatma.
Such a yogi is free from all the charms and temptations of the external world
and remains in Self delight. The joy that he finds within is not temporary and
fleeting. By contrast, the pleasures that others seek outside are only
temporary. The pleasures of the external world soon turn into pain, for in the
absence of one, the other is experienced. But this is not the case with the joy
of the yogi who is in the garden of delight all the time. It is not easy to
recognize such a great yogi because ordinary people always remain busy
protecting the image they have of themselves. They call that honor. And in
want of honor and name and fame, one gets caught by the image he creates
for himself, which is a false identity, a reflection of the lower ego. But those
yogis who tread the inner path go beyond name and fame, honor and
dishonor, and remain in a state of perpetual joy and delight. Those who know
both the real Self and the mere self walk on the earth radiating their eternal
delight through their behavior, and they are not concerned with name and
fame, pain and pleasure. They care not who thinks what about them because
they always feel that they are strangers in the world. The world is but a
resting camp for them, and never their home. They are usually

misunderstood, for only a few human beings have the capacity to understand
them. Only other sages who have gained wisdom and knowledge through
inner attainment can understand such great ones.
Previously, Sri Krishna taught Arjuna to be conscious of his honor, and
that teaching does not contradict what is said here. Sri Krishna was reminding
Arjuna of his duties by making him aware that he is a leader and a warrior,
not a coward or ordinary person. Self-honor and self-respect remind one of
his duties and the tasks he must fulfill. That kind of honor does not build a
false image. But those who remain deluded by creating a false image because
of their insecurities are not aware of their duties; they are selfish and
egotistical and work only for sense gratification. Such people do not have
self-respect because they know from within that they are not what they claim
to be. They remain helpless because they are addicted to the pleasures of the
senses, and they create defense mechanisms because of their fears and
insecurities. These two kinds of people are quite distinct: one has true selfrespect whereas the other merely creates a false image.
A teacher keenly observes the behavior of his students, and he finds that
many students do not have respect for themselves. Instead they condemn
themselves and try to hide the unwanted parts of their personalities by
creating masks for themselves. The images they present to others are based
on their insecurities. That is unhealthy and hinders the growth of the student.
A good student is aware of and reveres his real Self, and he practices
maintaining constant consciousness of the center within. That is real selfrespect, and if one loses it he becomes the victim of vanity and creates
defense mechanisms.
It does not matter to a sage whether anyone knows him or not, follows
him or not. Only the prepared ones can understand the height of his
realization and can be benefitted. But Arjuna is a leader and a warrior who is
already followed by millions, and if he does not have profound knowledge of
his dharma (duty), he will not be honored and followed by ordinary people.
His position is different than that of the sage. He needs to perform his dharma
skillfully, selflessly, and lovingly. The behavior of a leader becomes an
example for the masses. He should therefore be cautious, vigilant, and
conscious of his duties so that he does not create confusion for others.
Ordinary people usually honor their leaders and guides, but a true leader and
guide remains untouched, uninfluenced, and unaffected by the honors
bestowed on him by others.

The great leaders and guides of humanity do not change their attitudes
and lose their calm and balance because someone opposes them, someone
misunderstands them, or someone does not follow them. For they are firm in
the understanding that they are doing their dharma with full skill and
confidence. Such great leaders treat saints and sinners alike. They do not
judge others but accept them as they are. They neither hate nor uselessly
praise. The attitude of the sage toward the saint and the evil doer remains
even, and his faculty of judgment is never affected by extremes. He does not
favor the saint and is not cruel to the person who does evil. He has attained
evenness, tranquility, and peace, which are beyond a concern with virtue and
vice. According to yoga sadhana, this state of mind is called the witnessing
state; one learns to witness what is going on but does not involve himself in
it.

10. The yogi should incessantly place himself in yoga, dwelling in
solitude, alone, his mind and self controlled, having no expectations,
receiving no input into the senses.
11. Placing one’s stable seat in a clean place neither too high nor too
low, made of cloth, a black antelope skin, and kusha grass, one on top of
the other,
12. There making the mind one-pointed, with the mind, self, and
movement under control, sitting on the seat one should practice yoga for
self-purification,

13. Holding the trunk, head, and neck straight, unmoving and still,
observing the point in front of the nose, and not looking in various
directions.
14. With a pacified self, with all fear banished, remaining in the vow of a
celibate, controlling the mind, with the mind absorbed in Me, one should
dwell joined in yoga and intent upon Me.
15. Thus uniting himself in yoga, the yogi with a well-directed mind
reaches that peace the ultimate of which is absorption (nirvana), and the
foundation of which is in Me.
From the tenth verse onward a practical lesson is given that equally
benefits ascetics and those living in the world. Knowledge received from
sources other than the Self no doubt helps and inspires the sadhaka, but
without direct knowledge and experience of the Self, the thirst for knowledge
and attainment remains unquenched. When the sadhaka learns to light the fire
of knowledge, he begins treading the path of purification. He thereby attains
a state in which all his samskaras are burned, and he is purified. When we say
that everyone needs to be purified, it means that the mind ordinarily functions
like a slave to one’s samskaras and past habits. Then the mind is not
functioning as an instrument of the Self. A profound, precise, and practical
method of controlling the mind and its modifications is necessary. When one
develops a strong desire to know truth and realizes his helplessness, he has no
alternative but to follow the path of sadhana, the path of inner experience, the
path of light and delight.
A yogi is he whose purpose of life is to unite himself with the absolute
Truth. The term yogi is used for those who are making sincere efforts and
practicing to attain a state of samahita (samadhi) and those who have already
attained samahita. The path they follow is called yoga sadhana. If one really
has a burning desire to practice, then he begins treading the path of sadhana.
For that purpose a complete and practical method is expounded here.
Deciding to go into solitude in order to follow the path of sadhana is the first
dawning day of one’s life. One needs a place where he can be free from all
sorts of distractions such as noise and visitors coming and going. The place
one chooses should not be damp or too warm or too cold. The hours before
sunrise and after sunset are best for meditation. At other times one can
practice yoga exercises. Both asanas and pranayama should be included in
practice. Physical exercise keeps the body fit, and pranayama is important for

regulating the motion of the lungs. Without fitness of the body and control of
the breath, sadhana cannot be practiced. Food is another important factor.
Nutritious food that is simple, fresh, and properly chewed should be eaten
according to one’s capacity. But one’s time and energy should not be
concentrated on food. Sadhana alone should be the center of one’s activities.
Preparation for meditation is more important than the method of
meditation. Without preparation of both the external environment and of
oneself, meditation is not possible. The external environment should be kept
neat and clean, undisturbed, and free from agitation. Anything that disturbs
the mind creates an obstacle. The following conditions should be observed.
(1) In the beginning stage, meditation should be practiced in a quiet
and peaceful room where external sounds do not disturb the meditator.
The room should be comfortable and not overly humid. Burning incense
during meditation is injurious, but it can be burned before or after
meditation if one wishes.
(2) There are two sets of yoga asanas (postures) that should be
practiced. The postures for physical culture keep the body firm and are
thus complementary to the postures practiced for meditation. The seat
upon which one meditates should not be too high, for there is the
possibility that the meditator may fall, and if the seat is too low insects
may become a source of distraction. Another reason to keep oneself
above the ground is to keep the body unaffected by the temperature and
dampness. A wooden seat is preferred. It should be large enough so that
one can sit comfortably. Wood is a poor conductor of heat and cold, and
it is better than sitting on the ground or on metal or stone. Kusha is a
grass that in ancient times was used as a base, and on top was a fourfolded woolen blanket with a cotton spread over it. A tiger skin or deer
skin was sometimes used instead of a blanket. Those were all used in
order to have a cushion beneath and to insulate oneself from the ground
because in ancient times the aspirant meditated in a cave or outside.
Modern conveniences to control temperature, humidity, insects, and
such were not available. Thus the instructions given in the Bhagavad
Gita may be modified to suit one’s conditions and the material available.
(3) The meditator should sit in a posture that is comfortable and in
which he can keep his body steady and his head, neck, and trunk
straight. There are only a few postures that are used for meditation, and

among these the accomplished pose (siddhasana) is preferable. One can
also use the half lotus pose (ardhapadmasana) or the easy pose
(sukhasana). The position one chooses is not so important. One can even
choose to sit upright on a firm chair. That which is most important is to
keep the head, neck, and trunk in a straight line and to arrange the upper
and lower limbs in a definite way so that they do not create disturbance
and discomfort for the body.
(4) Having seated himself firmly in siddhasana or in another
posture, the meditator should gently close his eyes and focus the mind
on the base of the bridge between the two nostrils. The word nasagre
means in front of the two nostrils. It does not mean the tip of the nose, as
some translators and commentators think, but the bridge between the
two nostrils. By concentrating on that point the meditator becomes
aware of the flow of both breaths. It is unfortunate that most
commentators have only superficially commented on this verse, for
students may practice on the basis of erroneous interpretations and
injure themselves. How can one gaze on the tip of the nose and call that
meditation? There is an exercise like that, but it is called trataka, gazing.
It is a hatha yoga exercise for strengthening eyesight and concentration;
it is not at all a part of meditation. The meditative method begins with
the voluntary withdrawal of the senses and not with concentration of the
mind through external gazes. The word nasa does not mean the tip of
the nose but the nostrils, and agra bhage does not refer to the front of
the tip of the nose. Rather it is the juncture at which the bridge that
separates the two nostrils meets the top of the upper lip. Thus the mind
is fixed on the flow of both breaths so that sushumna is applied.
Ordinarily one of the nostrils is predominant, but in sushumna both
breaths flow equally.
(5) The mind and breath are interdependent; they react to one
another. Breath is the barometer of the mind and the body, for it
registers all the conditions of both. If something unusual happens in the
mental world, the flow of the breath changes. And if the body is in pain
or has a fever, the flow of the breath changes then as well. If one
receives shocking news, the breath becomes more rapid, disturbing the
motion of the lungs, the heart, the brain, and finally the mind. By
focusing the mind on the flow of breath, the mind experiences a joy of
concentration that purifies it. Many breathing exercises, especially when

one is in an emotionally intense state, have been proven useful. The
breath and mind are two inseparable friends.
(6) The purpose of meditation is threefold: first to apply sushumna;
then to become conscious of the unknown and hidden levels of life,
which is also known as awakening the primal force kundalini; and
finally to experience a state beyond by attaining samadhi.
(7) In order to attain samadhi, the yogi takes a vow of celibacy. The
word celibacy does not mean mere suppression of the sexual urge.
Brahmacharya means walking in Brahman, being conscious of Brahman
all the time. Brahma means shakti, and charya means how to direct. A
brahmachari is able to master and direct his energies toward the
attainment of the highest state of consciousness. Brahmacharya is not
limited to the control of the sexual urge but also involves the control of
mind, action, and speech. All one’s energies should be directed toward
Brahman consciousness so that the mind becomes one-pointed and turns
inward. This inward flow of mental energy leads to the Self, the center
of consciousness.
(8) Finally a yogi fathoms many levels of experience in his inner
world. Those experiences are inexplicably delightful. Such a great man
finally attains the state of oneness with the pure Self.

16. There is no yoga for one who eats much or who eats nothing at all or
for one who is inclined to excessive sleep or one who awakes altogether, O
Arjuna.
17. He whose food and enjoyment are balanced, whose movements in
actions are balanced, whose sleeping and waking are balanced, his yoga
becomes the eliminator of sorrows.
Those who overeat and those who eat less than the body needs are not
sensitive to the capacity of their bodies. They disturb their digestive systems
and cannot regulate their bowels. Proper digestion is necessary for good
health, and without good health, sadhana is not possible. When the yogi

learns to regulate all the urges and refrains from over-indulgence, he is able
to attain profound control over his mind. But if one does not regulate his
appetites by watching his capacity, perfection is never attained.
Many students fallaciously think that rigid austerities should be
practiced on the path of yoga. Some inexperienced aspirants go on fasts for a
long time because they think that physical mortification can help to purify
both body and mind. It should be clear that except during a period of
cleansing in which one practices kriyas such as the internal wash, the upper
wash, the lower wash, and the complete wash, fasting is not recommended.
Too much fasting affects one’s resistance, and he may become a victim of
disease. Yoga is a middle path. In yoga sadhana one should not touch the
extremes: overeating or fasting, oversleeping or not sleeping enough.
In the modern world most people have not learned to regulate their
appetites. They overindulge in sensual pleasures without taking heed of the
harmful effects the indulgence has on their bodies and minds. Obesity,
anorexia, and bulimia are three of the most frequent problems encountered by
physicians and psychotherapists today. For most people food is symbolic of
love and nurturance, so they either use food as a substitute for love and
nurturance, or they reject food as they reject the insincere love of their
parents. Bulimics do both. Many people also overeat because of sexual
frustration.
Yogic practices lead one to become sensitive to the effects of
overindulgence and austerities that are too severe. One is then able to find a
natural balance in all areas of his life. Through sadhana one learns to regulate
all aspects of his functioning and to gain mastery over the body, senses, and
mind. He keeps the body free from disease and weakness, and he keeps the
mind free from disturbance.

18. When a very well controlled mind remains stable in the Self alone,

detached from all desires, then one is called joined in yoga.
19. As a lamp in a place without breeze does not tremble—this is the
simile of a yogi whose mind is controlled practicing the yoga of the Self.
20. Where the mind ceases, withdrawn through the observance of yoga,
where one sees the self in the Self, one is satiated in the Self.
In yoga sadhana, samyama (self-discipline) is important. In fact, it is the
very means for the renunciate to attain Brahman, for the yogi to attain
samadhi, and for the man of action to perform his duty skillfully and
selflessly. Non-attachment is part of that discipline. We have already
explained that non-attachment and discipline should be properly understood.
Discipline should not be seen as a punishment or as something imposed by
teachers, and non-attachment should not be viewed as implying indifference,
carelessness, or lack of love for others. Those who are not able to practice
discipline cannot foresee its positive effects; they feel that discipline is not
necessary. For fear of losing their little joys, they do not want to discipline
themselves. So is the case with people who are attached to objects and human
relationships because they use all these as crutches and as means to satisfy
their sense gratifications. Such people misunderstand non-attachment. Nonattachment brings about the love divine, and it opens new horizons, which
helps one understand that higher joys can be obtained in life.
No one in this world is satisfied. Everyone understands that and accepts
it as a fact of life. But most people are afraid of the unknown and do not
search for something higher. The ordinary person is not sure that the search
for the unknown will give him something higher than what he has already.
He is not happy as he is and yet is afraid of searching in the unknown.
Dissatisfaction and fear are two great enemies of the human being; they
create a great barrier in the process of unfoldment. The ordinary human being
remains clinging to his dissatisfaction, not knowing anything better. But if he
would begin to discipline himself and develop non-attachment, he would
quickly begin to find something far better than what he leaves behind.
When the roving mind of the aspirant is brought back from its dissipated
nature to a center of focus by meditative practices, when his mind becomes
steady and one-pointed, and when he does not long for worldly desires, he is
called a yogi. It is necessary to explain what is meant by the object or center
of focus for the mind. Every person has his own mind that differs from the
nature of other minds. The capacity for perceiving and conceptualizing

differs in both degree and quality. The object that is recommended to the
student as a point of focus during meditation is therefore a delicate matter. If
the object is disagreeable to the student, he cannot practice. He begins
fighting within himself instead of letting go. There are already innumerable
objects in the mind, for the mind itself manufactures numerous objects and
expresses them through symbols, ideas, fantasies, hallucinations, and dreams.
The question rises: How will adding one more object to the mind be helpful?
Verse 19 tells us that the object of meditation should not be anything but
Atman, the pure Self. All of the objects created by the mind are partial and
incomplete. But this object of meditation is all-encompassing and is the
source of all other objects. That brings another question: how can one have as
an object for his meditation something abstract, timeless, infinite, and
eternal? To answer this question it is necessary to distinguish between
concentration and meditation, which are two different states and experiences
on the inner path.
There is no meditation in concentration, but there is already
concentration in meditation. Many teachers these days think meditation can
be attained without concentration. That ignorant idea is misleading. The mind
as it is in its ordinary nature remains in a dissipated state. Without gathering
together and concentrating the energy of the mind, the deeper state of
meditation is not possible. The student who practices sitting in a quiet and
calm place even for a short time can experience a bit of unusual joy, though
he is not able to experience the deep joy of the meditative state. Why should
one be afraid of concentration? Some say that concentration of mind can
bring about strain and stress and thus should not be practiced. They even say
that discipline is not needed, and they create simplified methods and call
them meditation. Such teachings appear to make difficult sadhana easy, but
these easy methods do not lead one to the higher dimensions of life.
For concentrating the mind, one needs something concrete: a form,
image, or symbol that carries some meaning. Abstract thought can lead one to
the contemplative state but not to a concentrated state of mind. Prescribing an
object for the concentration of mind requires a skilled teacher. The best
concentration is achieved when the student mentally centers his mind on the
flow of the breath. It is easy for the mind to become concentrated if the breath
is the focal point. That has many benefits. First the mind and breath, which
are closely linked together, begin functioning in a coordinated way. When
concentration is absent, the cooperation remains unconscious; it requires

effort to establish coordination on a conscious level. Second, when the
student concentrates on the breath, he is able to discover the defects in his
breathing and becomes mentally aware of breathing patterns that need to be
changed, such as jerky, noisy breathing or habits of inhaling shallowly or
creating a pause between inhalation and exhalation. These bad habits are the
sources of many physical imbalances and illnesses that cannot be treated with
medicine.
In most great meditative traditions of the world, the breath is the center
for focusing the mind. Only those teachers who do not have direct experience
with the path of meditation and who have lost the sensitivity for the well
being of their students prescribe a gross object as a focal point. With the
breath as an object, the student is first led toward concentration, which
gradually becomes more subtle. Following this fine thread of breath, he
attains inwardness. The mind then acquires the capacity of subtlety, and one
develops a penetrating sense of internal observation.
Concentration and meditation should ultimately lead one to Atman
alone. One-pointedness of mind is an important requisite to help one
accomplish that. When one learns to concentrate on the breath and removes
all the defects that he finds in his breathing patterns, he tries to understand
who it is that is inhaling and exhaling. There are traditions that believe in the
coordination of mantra with the breath at this stage. Mantra is a Sanskrit
word, sound, syllable, or set of words. It is a means to remove all the
impurities of mind. There are a few mantras that are used while inhaling and
exhaling that do not disturb the flow of the breath. The sadhaka reaches a
point in his practice where he not only breathes the air but constantly
remembers the mantra with each inhalation and exhalation. That leads the
mind to constant awareness of the mantra. When the consciousness of the
mantra is deepened, the mantra is able to guide the mind in the inner world.
The student is then taught to be aware of the inner light that already
burns without flickering. When the mind experiences that light, it elevates
itself to a state of joy that it did not experience before. That light which is
within us is the finest and best form upon which to meditate. Without that
light we would not be able to see, observe, verify, and discriminate anything
in the external world. It is the light of consciousness that is experienced in a
concentrated form. The mind then begins to see clearly; it is no longer
clouded. Then the light of consciousness and mantra become one, because at
that stage the mantra is not actually remembered, but its meaning and feeling

are revealed. At first one remembers and repeats the mantra in a gross way,
but gradually it is experienced in a more subtle way. When one develops the
feeling of constant awareness of the mantra, it unites with the mainstream of
consciousness where light and sound are inseparably mingled. That is a
perfect state of concentration. One has then attained profound control of the
mind, and he experiences a constant closeness and union with the Selfillumined Atman. When the sadhaka has mastered the art of concentration,
his mind is fixed on the Self only. The mind of an ordinary person is
dissipated, disturbed, and fickle, but the mind of the sadhaka attains
steadiness. Such a sadhaka has mastered and controlled the usual flow of
mental energy that goes out to the external world. From the very beginning
the object of concentration must be carefully chosen. At first it should be the
breath and later breath with mantra well coordinated and united. In a higher
stage sound and light are united, and in the highest state pure Consciousness
alone exists.
Meditation is an inward process of therapy; it is able to remove all the
impurities and weaknesses that are responsible for creating disorder and
illness. Meditational therapy is quite different from hypnosis. In a hypnotic
state, instead of having a direct experience of the unknown dimensions of
life, one is influenced by suggestions from someone outside or by selfsuggestion. Therapy based on hypnosis is an unguided method, for the
therapist and client do not know what they will encounter next. They are
being guided by their conscious and unconscious minds but not by the light
of consciousness. Many times in such cases the therapist loses touch with the
client, and the client with his consciousness. Many terrifying experiences
may come from the unconscious of the client when the hypnotist is not able
to maintain control over the hypnotic session. That form of therapy goes only
so far. The great therapists of the past had to abandon that method, although
lately hypnosis has been developed further and used successfully in certain
cases. But those who practice hypnosis can never develop a profound training
program that independently leads one to the source of knowledge and light.
By contrast, on the path of meditation one is led to Self-realization.

21. The ultimate happiness is that which is grasped by intelligence and is
beyond the senses. When one knows this happiness, dwelling in it, he no
longer moves from the knowledge of that reality,
22. Attaining which one no longer believes any other gain to be greater
than that—staying in which, one is not shaken by even the greatest sorrow.
23. Now, that elimination of union with sorrows is to be known as yoga.
That yoga should be practiced resolutely by one who has made his mind
dispassionate.

When the light of pure reason begins guiding the yogi, he is no longer
victimized by the distress that is experienced by ordinary people. Then
distraction and distress do not affect him in any way. That which is taken as a
great calamity by the ordinary person is nothing serious for the yogi because
he has attained the state of perfection by controlling the senses and mind and
all its modifications. The word perfection is used in many situations. One can
be considered to be perfect in many different things such as in writing,
singing, gymnastics, and so on. But here perfection means that state of
perfect control over the mind. The yogi attains that state only after his mind is
fully concentrated and uninterruptedly flows toward the center of
consciousness. This is a deep state of meditation, one of the stages of
samadhi.
These verses explain that through the meditative method, buddhi
becomes one-pointed, sharp, and able to fathom the subtler levels of life to
which the sense organs have no access. The joy that is then experienced is
unmeasurable and inexplicable, beyond the grasp of sense organs and mind.
When one experiences this state, there is no chance that he may slip back to
desiring the sense enjoyments, because he has already attained that joy which
is infinitely superior to sensory pleasures. Verses 21, 22, and 23 explain the

joyful experience of the yogi who has mastered his senses, mind, and buddhi.
One who realizes this eternal joy experiences many benefits: (1) He is
cheerful, calm, content, and undisturbed in all situations. (2) He does not
depend on the senses to supply pleasure, for his joy is a million times higher
than that attained from sensory pleasure. (3) He is not at all dependent on
external experiences, for he has become self-reliant. (4) His is a joy that is
experienced by the Self only. Self delights in Self. (5) His meditation is
profound, and he is so established in meditation that he cannot do otherwise;
he meditates all the time. (6) His happiness is of a supreme quality. It is
infinite and words have no power to measure or explain it. (7) When that joy
is attained, one is firm in knowing that there is no joy higher than that.
In the first chapters of the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna identifies himself with
his negative personality, so Sri Krishna leads him to remember his true Self.
Arjuna then leaves his grief behind and commits himself to the yoga of
perfection, mastery, and joy. That joy is unparalleled in its nature and is
experienced directly from the fountain of joy itself. It does not depend on any
object. It is a profound love without a beloved. It is love without an object,
meditation without an object. Meditation is like falling in love. The
difference is that ultimately it has no object, whereas love in the external
world is held captive by the object.

24. Giving up all desires born of volition in their entirety, controlling the
entire group of senses with the mind alone and from all sides—
25. Slowly, slowly, one should turn away with the help of intelligence,
which is held in steadfastness, making the mind stable in the Self. Then one

should think entirely of nothing.
26. In whatever direction the fickle and unstable mind wanders out, from
that very direction one should pull it and bring it under the control of the
Self alone.
27. The best happiness comes only to such a yogi whose mind is pacified,
whose dust has settled, who has become identified with Brahman, and who
is free of all stains.
28. Thus uniting the self in yoga, the yogi, free of all stains, easily enjoys
the ultimate happiness, which is contact with Brahman.
Verses 24 through 28 present a profound description of sadhana and
inspire the aspirant. These verses also refer to the dark side of human nature
and teach the student not to do that which is harmful to him. The pure Self
should be the center of activity. From morning until evening and from
evening until the next morning, all of the aspirant’s activities should be
directed only toward the attainment of Self. Because diversions are many,
habits are strong, and attractions are immense, one needs a one-pointed mind,
strong determination, and will power. Otherwise he will not be able to
accomplish the purpose of life.
With the help of concentration, the sadhaka gathers together the
dissipated forces of mind. With full strength he begins walking the path of
the inward journey. One who is able to put his rajasic activities to rest
consciously and voluntarily, whose mind has attained a state of quietness,
finds his way in the world of inner experiences. Free from desire for pleasure
and sense gratification, such a yogi identifies himself with his essential
nature: the pure Self. This state of mind is not the result of sadhana practiced
halfheartedly or sporadically. Rather it results from that sadhana which is
given the highest priority. Then all the activities of life—thought, speech, and
action—become auxiliary to sadhana. If the aspirant has patience and only
one desire to fulfill—Self-realization—then alone is that state attained.
Modern students lack patience and determination; they want quick
results without working hard. They are like children who sow the seed and
pour water over it and the next morning dig up the seed to find out why it has
not grown. Patience is a great virtue in sadhana. One who continues to follow
the path of sadhana with firm determination and does not change his path no
doubt attains the permanent abode of the Eternal. Suppose one’s purpose is to
travel to a distant city. One day he rushes forward on a road that leads to that

city, but after a few hours of effort he turns back and the next day sets out on
a different route. If he continues to do that, he will never reach his
destination.
The following are essential for an aspirant: (1) He should have profound
knowledge of the path he is treading. (2) He should be fully equipped before
he treads the path. That means he should discipline himself. (3) He should
patiently and steadily tread his path. He should not forget his goal no matter
what he does, whether he is studying, eating, or exercising. (4) The law of
karma states that nothing is wasted and nothing is lost. One is bound to
receive the fruits of his actions sooner or later. The student should have faith
that his sadhana will not be wasted. (5) Before eating, sleeping, or practicing
meditation and as many times as it is convenient and possible, one should
dedicate his sadhana and surrender the fruits to the Lord of life. By following
these principles, the sadhaka develops awareness of the Eternal and is no
longer distracted by the temporal world. He experiences the greatest of all
joys and happiness, which arises in the depths and heights of his inner Self.

29. One whose self is joined in yoga, looking evenly at everything, sees
the Self dwelling in all beings and all beings in the Self.
30. He who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, for him I do
not vanish nor does he vanish from Me.
31. He who, established in unity, devotes himself to Me, who am dwelling
in all beings though operative in manifold ways, that yogi still remains in
Me.
32. He who sees everything alike as similar to himself, O Arjuna,
whether in comfort or discomfort, he is considered to be the highest yogi.

The Self-realized yogi sees the eternal, omnipresent, omniscient, pure
Self everywhere. He sees himself in all and all in himself. He realizes that the
Self, the Lord of life, is in all beings and all are in the Lord. He knows that he
cannot be separated from the universal consciousness, for he is one with it
and is virtually that universal consciousness. Such a yogi’s mind dwells in the
state of evenness. For him pain and joy are the same, yet he remains sensitive
to the pain and misery of others. He is aware of that which causes misery and
also of that which brings worldly pleasure. His yoga practices and the
attainment of a deep meditative state do not lead him to the black hole of
nothingness but enable him to sympathize, love, help, and serve yet to remain
in a state of tranquility. He is gifted with the special quality of knowledge
through which he feels pain for those who suffer as though it were his own
suffering. Such is the state of a yogi who is endowed with the great gift of
sensitivity and yet is able to maintain evenness at the same time. He has the
capacity to feel the misery of others but is not affected by it. He has learned
the profound art of living and being; he lives in the world but is not of it.
The true meaning of the word samatvam (evenness) can only be realized
by meditators and yogis. Others can merely intellectualize and speculate
about its meaning. When the yogi touches the timeless and infinite
knowledge in deep meditation, he is able to see the present, past, and future
and can attain comprehensive knowledge of all three dimensions at a glance.
Such a yogi has attained samatvam. He sees Atman everywhere. For him
time, space, and causality do not create any limitations. With this limitless
knowledge his mind becomes even, samatva. He loves all equally and hates
none; he includes all and excludes none.
The yogi maintains his individuality yet is always fully conscious of
Atman. Being one with the Eternal, he is free from destructibility even
though the objects of the world are ever changing and subject to destruction.
Such a yogi releases himself from the conditionings created by the three
gunas and from the limitations of time, space, and causation. The entire chain
of life from the unknown to the known and the known to the unknown, from
birth to death and death to the hereafter is unveiled to him and reveals its
secret. He is the knower of all events, yet he is free from the changes he
experiences.
Such a great one is like a tank that is overflowing with water. The tank
maintains its individuality even though the same water is both within and
without and all around. The perennial flow of knowledge fills the yogi and

keeps him overflowing. He is constantly aware of his eternal existence, but
he still maintains his higher ego for the sake of serving others rather than for
maintaining his individuality. He is firmly established in uninterrupted
consciousness of the Absolute. The peace found in that state is a living peace,
not like the peace one finds in a cemetery or in isolation. Such peace does not
come to one who withdraws himself from his duty because he feels that he is
not able to perform his duty skillfully. That peace comes only to one who
stands at the edge that unites the human and divine. Such a yogi is considered
to be a person of great wisdom and is adored by all.

Arjuna said
33. I do not see the stability of this yoga through equanimity that you
have taught, O Krishna, to be lasting because of the mind’s fickleness.
34. The mind is indeed fickle, turbulent, very powerful, and strong. I
believe its control to be as difficult as that of the wind.

The Blessed Lord said
35. No doubt, O Arjuna, the mind is difficult to control and ever moving.
But, O Son of Kunti, it can be held through practice and dispassion.
36. Yoga is difficult to be found by someone whose self is not in control
—this is My view. But by someone who endeavors with a controlled self, it
can be attained by appropriate methods.

Arjuna accepts the validity of the teachings imparted to him, but like any
student he wonders if it is really possible for him to attain the yoga of
equanimity, for he recognizes that the mind is very restless, obstinate, and
difficult to control. In the Vedas, Upanishads, and many other scriptures the
mind is considered to be both an obstacle and at the same time a means of
liberation. The conscious part of the mind is but a small part of the whole of
the mind. Modern education makes an effort to cultivate only the conscious
mind, which functions during the waking state. The rest of the mind remains
unknown. That unknown part of the mind is called the unconscious. The
functioning of the unconscious is difficult for the aspirant to comprehend and
control. When the yogi talks of controlling the mind, it means the whole of
the mind, not just the conscious part. Arjuna says that controlling the mind is
comparable to controlling the wind, for it is impossible for anyone to have
control over the wind.
The purpose of yoga sadhana is to understand the mind and its
modifications (the way the mind functions in both the external and internal
worlds) and to develop control over the mind. Self-control is that state in
which one is not swayed by selfish desires or by the sense pleasures that are
responsible for creating injurious ties of attachment. Attaining self-control is
truly a difficult task. Hearing Arjuna’s uncertainty Sri Krishna replies, “O
Arjuna, no doubt the mind is dissipated and difficult to control. But when the
sadhaka consistently makes sincere effort to isolate the mind from the objects
of enjoyment and attachment, he can attain control of it.” Vairagya (nonattachment) is an important means to attain control of the mind; it should be
understood and practiced.
The human being’s stay in the mundane world is very brief. On the path
to eternity this world is just one of the camps. Therefore do not become
attached to it. Always remember that this is not your permanent abode.
Everyone is brought to that awareness many times in life, but again the strong
desire for enjoying sensory pleasure distracts the mind. When someone very
dear to us dies and we take that person’s body to the cemetery, everyone
there feels the presence of vairagya whispering its profound lesson. We are
born to die; there is nothing in this world that is permanent and not subject to
death. Death is an alarm that makes every human being realize that
attachment to sense pleasures, to things of the world, and to relationships is
painful.
Vairagya is the knowledge that dawns each time we go off the path and

become attached to something of the world, for invariably that attachment
causes pain and leads us to give up that attachment. That knowledge draws
us, but strong habits and the desire to enjoy sensory pleasure do not allow us
to pay heed to it. At the cemetery the knowledge of vairagya dawns for a
short time. Everyone at the cemetery suddenly becomes a sage and begins
realizing and talking about the impermanent nature of the temporal world.
During that time everyone is attuned to one and the same reality, but after the
body is buried and the mourners turn toward their homes, they forget the
lesson that they received at the cemetery. Once more they become busy doing
the same things as before.
Gain and loss are two experiences that the human being repeatedly
encounters throughout life. When one gains something temporal, he becomes
imbalanced and overjoyed. And when he loses it, he is plunged into sadness.
Whatever is gained will sooner or later be lost. When one becomes aware that
these two experiences always occur together, he realizes that attachment is
unhealthy and the source of much misery. The yogi knows that sooner or
later he will have to lose even the most well-loved things in the world. He
constantly remembers that change is inevitable in the external world. He
learns to maintain constant consciousness of the pure Self and adjusts himself
to the changing situations of the mundane world.
To gain mastery over the mind, the development of non-attachment is
essential. By practicing a well-designed sadhana and applying all the means
one has, he can attain mastery. Creating one’s own method of sadhana will
not help in gaining control of mind, action, and speech. The proper means are
those that have already been experienced by the great yogis in the past.

Arjuna said
37. One who does not make full effort but maintains faith, his mind
slipping away from yoga, thereby not attaining full accomplishment in
yoga, what state does he come to, O Krishna?
38. Does he perchance, fallen from both, vanish like a broken up cloud
established in nothing, O Krishna, lost on the path of Brahman?
39. Do indeed sunder this doubt in my mind, O Krishna, in its entirety.
There is no other who can appropriately be considered a remover of this
doubt.
In these three verses Arjuna asks the same questions that are often asked
by modern students. Even when a student tries his best, is faithful to his
sadhana, and has firm faith in the path, he still encounters failures and may
find himself on a plateau from whence he feels incapable of attaining his
goal. With that concern Arjuna wants to know what happens to such people
and if there is an alternative path to follow. Sometimes despite his sincere
efforts, the aspirant does not make progress on his inner path. That creates
serious confusion in the mind of the aspirant, and he may find himself lost,
not fit for either the path of spirituality or for the path of the world.
On the path to eternity and spirituality, one is like a pilgrim. Why should
one be denied his right to complete his pilgrimage if he is sincere, truthful,
and makes efforts with all his skill? Why is his path suddenly blocked? Why
is he left in a state of limbo? These doubts not only affect Arjuna but all
aspirants.

The Blessed Lord said
40. O Son of Pritha, neither here in this life nor there in the next is there
any danger of his perishing. No one who performs blessed deeds at all goes
to an evil state, O Beloved.
41. Attaining the worlds of performers of meritorious deeds, dwelling
there for long periods, one who has fallen from yoga is born in the homes
of pure and glorious people.
42. Or he is born in the family of wise yogis. A birth such as this is very
difficult to come to in this world.
43. There he again gains union with the wisdom that came from his
previous body. Then he undertakes further endeavor toward full
accomplishment, O Prince of Kurus.
44. Because of that previous habit of practicing, he is carried even
without his will. Desirous of knowing yoga, he transcends the verbal
knowledge of God.
45. Purified of sins, endeavoring with effort, reaching accomplishment
in more than one lifetime, then he attains the supreme state.
In order to dispel the doubts of Arjuna, Sri Krishna explains that good
deeds and good actions never vanish into nothingness. There is no evil power
that can obstruct one from receiving the positive outcome of his sincere
efforts. Arjuna thinks that there is no place for one who has failed to attain
perfection in yoga either in the world or on the path of spirituality. That is not

true. Only a few aspirants attain perfection in this birth, but others continue
treading the path and are born again. Those who are not completely
successful in treading their paths are born into families where they again have
the opportunity to pursue their quest. Suppose one cannot complete his work
today and that work is very important. Does he not try to complete the task
the next day? After death the samskaras that are not fulfilled remain in the
unconscious, and those desires and motivations compel the individual soul to
assume a new garment called the body. Thus one does not begin afresh from
the very beginning but continues from the point he last reached. Such a great
task as Self-realization cannot possibly be accomplished in the small span of
a single lifetime.
Birth does not happen by chance or by accident; it is not an event that
occurs suddenly out of nowhere. If it were, one human being would not carry
certain motivations, desires, and abilities that differ from those of another.
Western thinkers are still bewildered by this philosophy. They are trying to
find the answer to why one is born with certain characteristics in the world.
Some great Western thinkers and philosophers believe in the philosophy of
rebirth, but most psychologists do not accept the validity of reincarnation.
Psychologists spend their time debating over whether heredity or learning is
responsible for an individual’s unique characteristics. They are trying to
discover the answers by intellectualization and experiments conducted on
superficial levels. Many cases of reincarnation and rebirth are documented
every year in both the East and West. Those who have been following the
spiritual path have access to the infinite library of their memories of the past
and can recall them with full clarity. Without examining all the levels of
consciousness of human life, how can anyone claim or prove that he did not
exist before yet exists now? This very existence is proof that one has existed
before.
Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna that the yogi who could not complete his
task does not remain in limbo but starts again and completes his task in a
future birth. He is born into a good family that offers him an environment
conducive to the completion of his task. Such an aspirant sometimes feels
that some unknown power is leading and guiding him to follow the path. It is
actually his own powerful desire brought from the past that compels him to
tread the path once again, but he is not conscious of that fact because his
brain and the environment are new. On the path of spirituality if one is
sincere and faithful but does not have the right means and environment, he

cannot progress. The right means are a healthy body, a healthy environment,
a sound and clear mind, determination, will power, self-confidence, and nonattachment. If any of these means is absent, progress is obstructed. But when
the environment is conducive and the above mentioned means are
strengthened, the difficulties one has encountered before are removed and the
path becomes easy. One then attains perfection.
Typically students remain unaware of their potentials for many years.
Sometimes a mental shock, a conversation with a sage, or visiting a familiar
place reminds one of his past, and he can come in touch with that aspect of
his personality that remained unknown until that point.
Most students want to know how many births are required to complete
the journey to Self-realization. That is decided by the aspirant and not by
Providence or by the teacher. If the aspirant learns to apply all his resources
to make his mind one-pointed and inward, he can attain his goal in this
lifetime. For those who have a wick, lamp, and oil and put them together,
their lamp is ready to be lit. It is true that when the disciple is ready, the
master appears. Lighting the lamp depends on both the disciple and the
master. The aspirant’s lamp is lit by the master, but one should not forget that
that light is not the light of the master but was handed over to him in the same
manner by the spiritual tradition.

46. The yogi excels the ascetics. He is believed to be greater even than
those endowed with knowledge. The yogi is greater than those who perform
actions. Therefore, become a yogi, O Arjuna.
47. Among all the yogis, he who faithfully devotes himself to Me, with his
inner self entered into Me, I consider him the one most united in yoga.
Verse 47 refers to the 37th verse and answers Arjuna’s question
regarding an alternative path if one has not attained perfection on the path of
yoga. As one jacket does not suit all, so one path does not suit all. Diverse are
the paths, but the goal is one. The path of yoga is greater than the path of
practicing austerities, for austerities are merely means to purify the mind.

Austerities are external observances that are limited to physical cleanliness
and to the control of the senses. They are practiced in many ways: by the
ignorant in a rigid way and by the knowledgeable for the sake of purification
of the body and senses. The yogi also practices austerities, but he goes further
and practices higher sadhana in order to attain control over the mind and its
modifications. He then directs all his mental energy toward the center of
perfection. His goal is to attain samadhi, and he does not rest until he attains
it.
There is another category of yogis whose minds are completely devoted,
who have perfect faith, and who have completely surrendered themselves to
the pure Self alone. They are considered to be special children of God. They
are the chosen ones. Sri Krishna makes this comparison between different
types of aspirants to help Arjuna understand that unwavering faith is a strong
force that can lead the devotee to the highest perfection. The path of love in
which one learns to give with reverence and dedication all that one has
unhesitatingly and unquestioningly requires great strength. Therefore
commitment to that path is higher than commitment to the path of austerities.
Here for the first time Sri Krishna mentions the path of devotion. The path of
devotion is not the emotionalism that leads people toward chanting, dancing,
shaking, and tears. It is complete giving until one has nothing further to give.
The Lord says, “Empty thy vessel and I will fill thee.” To be completely
emptied, one must learn to be like the ocean, for the ocean continually
evaporates itself yet is always full. By giving, the same is returned. The law
of giving fulfills one. Love is giving and fulfillment.
Here ends the sixth chapter, in which the path of meditation and a
glimpse of alternative paths are described.

Chapter Seven
Knowledge of the Absolute in its Entirety

The Blessed Lord said
1. With your mind attached to Me, O Son of Pritha, uniting yourself in
yoga, depending entirely on Me, listen to the way through which you will
know Me in My entirety without doubt.
2. I shall teach you knowledge (jnana) together with realization (vijnana)
in their entirety, knowing which thereafter nothing more remains to be
known.
3. Among thousands of human beings only a few endeavor for
perfection. Of those endeavoring accomplished ones, only a few know Me
in reality.
In the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, Sri Krishna often uses
the word “Me” for the real and pure Self. This might confuse and bewilder
the modern student. One should not forget that Sri Krishna is a perfect
enlightened incarnation and therefore is correct in using the words “I” and
“Me” to refer to divinity rather than using the third person. That is a direct
way of relating to the dearest disciples. Modern teachers become carried

away and think that they too can talk in this way, but when they do, it is
usually because of their egotism. In fact they have not attained a state of
perfection but are trying to show off, which is very misleading to the student.
It promotes only “gurudom” and not the Godhead. Many who claim to be
men of God these days are indeed men, but they are hardly godlike. The
student should be aware that a true teacher is completely selfless and loving.
When a modern teacher asks his students to dedicate their time, money, and
energy, and all that they have to him, his teaching is enveloped in egotism
and selfishness. If the wants of a teacher are the same as those of his disciple,
what is the difference between the two? How can such a teacher help a
student? A good teacher is known for his selflessness. If that quality is
absent, one should not follow him. It is better not to have a teacher than to be
trapped by false teachings. A modern teacher cannot be compared with Sri
Krishna and should not pretend to be. Sri Krishna was the greatest yogi that
ever lived on the earth; he was unparalleled in knowledge in all respects.
Sri Krishna instructs his dear disciple, Arjuna, in the art and science of
the knowledge that dispels ignorance and enables one to see truth clearly. He
states that the aspirant should fix his heart on the highest alone and dedicate
his whole life to the Lord, the Self of all. The aspirant should not allow his
mind and emotions to travel in any other direction but should take refuge in
the uninterrupted consciousness of Truth, through which flows the perennial
knowledge of the Eternal in all its fullness. When that knowledge is attained,
there remains nothing more to be attained. Among the thousands who travel
on the path of spirituality, only a few individuals attain such perfection.
The sixth chapter explained attainment of the highest state through
meditation. Having understood the method of meditation, Arjuna now wants
to know the object of meditation and an alternative method for attaining the
heights that are reached by yogis. This theme continues in chapters seven
through eleven, and more explicit instructions are given to Arjuna.
Lessons imparted by an accomplished teacher directly to his beloved
disciple have a more profound impact on the mind and heart of the student
than reading and studying the scriptures. The questions that are not answered
by the scriptures and teachings of the sages or by any other means are finally
answered at the summit that one attains through direct experience. Without
direct experience, doubts still lurk. Every aspirant longs to have direct
knowledge. It is not that he does not believe in the teachings of the great
sages and the scriptures; they do inspire and help him. But attainment of

perfection is possible only through Self-realization. Therefore a need arises
for a perfectly devised method of preparing oneself to receive that
knowledge.
The first instruction in this chapter is to maintain constant awareness
that the Self alone exists. One should practice a method of sadhana to attain
that insight, for without having knowledge of the goal and purpose of
sadhana, nothing can be attained. Even if the sadhana is devised profoundly,
if one does not have knowledge of his goal, he cannot progress, for he
becomes a victim of allurements and is bound to stumble again and again.
Many students begin practicing meditation without knowing why they are
practicing. Practicing meditation without knowledge of the goal is like
walking along a path without knowing one’s destination. First the subject
should be known in its entirety, and then one should pursue his practice.
Jnana and vijnana are two kinds of knowledge that we find in the
scriptures. Jnana is knowledge of the Absolute; vijnana is the knowledge for
devising the perfect method of sadhana. When one attains these two aspects
of knowledge, he can tread the path and attain perfection. One among
thousands reaches that perfection, and among those, only a fortunate few
know the real Self in its entirety. Real knowledge is that knowledge after
which nothing remains to be attained. The third verse explains that after
attaining the state of samadhi or perfection, there still remains to be attained
the highest state: Self-realization. In the state of perfection the aspirant attains
the highest goal that an individual is capable of achieving. The last step is
total expansion of the knowledge that he has attained: he becomes one with
the Whole.

4. Earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intelligence, and ego, this is My

primordial nature, Prakriti, divided eightfold.
5. This is My immanent nature. Know My other transcendent nature,
which has become the souls (jivas), O Long-armed One, by which this
world is sustained.
6. All the beings have their origination in this; hold this to be true. I am
the origin as well as the dissolution of the entire world.
7. There is nothing at all beyond Me, O Arjuna. Everything is woven in
Me like gems on a thread to form a necklace.
Every object in the world is gifted with a peculiar and unique quality.
All that we see in the external world has some distinct quality that is not
found in the same way elsewhere. Ultimately there is only one source from
which all the innumerable aspects of phenomenal existence are manifest, but
that source remains obscured from human vision.
In these verses Sri Krishna explains all the levels of manifestation from
the gross to the subtlest. He addresses Arjuna as “long armed.” meaning one
who has the ability to grasp all-encompassing knowledge. That knowledge is
imparted by the teacher only when the student has widened the horizon of his
vision. Sri Krishna says that in the external world there are eight constituents:
earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intellect, and ego. He says to Arjuna,
“These eight constituents make up my lowermost body, but within these there
is another, highest essence. On this is sustained all beings. I am the
originator, sustainer, and annihilator of this whole universe. Just as the beads
are strung on a thread, everything is woven in me.”
The aspirant should learn to identify himself with the source of
manifestation. Then it will be easy for him to grasp the knowledge in the
Bhagavad Gita. When the student is faithful, eager to receive that knowledge,
and when he applies all his resources with full devotion, that knowledge is
grasped. But one should not forget that for attaining that knowledge, he needs
a profound method of sadhana devised by examining his own capacities and
abilities.

8. I am the flavor in the waters, O Son of Kunti, and the radiance of the
moon and the sun, I am pranava (OM) in all the Vedas, the sound in space,
and manliness in men.
9. I am beautiful fragrance in the earth and brilliance in the sun, the
living force in all beings, and I am asceticism in the ascetics.
10. Know Me to be the ancient seed of all beings, O Son of Pritha. I am
the wisdom in the wise and the splendor in the splendid.
11. I am the strength in the strong, free of desire and attachment. I am
that desire in beings which is not opposed to righteousness.
12. All the sattvic states, as well as the rajasic and the tamasic ones,
originate from Me, know them to be thus. I am not in them, yet they are in
Me.
Sri Krishna further explains the nature of the elements of earth, water,
fire, air, and space. He says to Arjuna that all the powers in the universe, “the
fragrance of the earth, the taste of water, the luster of fire, the touch of the
wind, the sound of space, the radiance of the sun, the light of the moon, the
universal sound of OM, the life of the animate ones, the very essence of all
beings, the desire to do one’s duty, the valor of brave men, have risen from
one source, and this I am.” These verses do not explain the process of
creation but that of manifestation. There is an important difference between
these two words. The word creation is used in the philosophy of dualism.
Dualists believe that apart from the existence of God, nature is also selfexistent, and with the help of that nature, God created the world. There is
another conception: God, the ultimate power of the universe, nature, and the

individual soul are all self-existent. But these ideas are dismissed by the
philosophy of Advaita, which holds that there is one and only one absolute
Reality without a second and all that we see, the entire universe, is but a
manifestation of the one Truth.
To help Arjuna understand this truth and to expand his consciousness,
Sri Krishna explains that the fragrance of the earth, the taste of water, the
luster of fire, the touch of the wind, and the sound in space are the
manifestations of the absolute One. The aspirant should become aware that
all these qualities of the different elements are but different faces of the same
One.
Verse 8 refers to the sacred word OM (A-U-M), a universal sound that is
the very theme of the Upanishads and Vedas. The three syllables, A, U, M,
personify the waking, dreaming, and sleeping states. But the silent soundless
sound is the fourth state called turiya. After attaining the state of turiya, the
wise can visualize each state separately and yet all at once.* The Lord of life,
though He manifested this universe, remains hidden beyond all the levels of
consciousness, just as turiya, which contains waking, dreaming, and sleeping
yet remains beyond them all. OM is called pranava. By constantly
remembering this sound and understanding its meaning, one is led to the state
of this soundless sound. When the aspirant uses this sound in both meditation
and contemplation, he realizes its various aspects. The aspects of this sound
from the gross to the subtlemost have been explained in Upanishadic
literature and other scriptures on sadhana.
Before a student begins treading the path of bhakti yoga, jnana yoga, or
the yoga of action, he should have sufficient knowledge of the nature of his
body, senses, mind, intellect, and ego as well as of the source of this universe
so that he can unhesitatingly begin practicing to attain that knowledge
directly. When the student begins identifying himself with his essential nature
and then expands his consciousness to the consciousness of the perfect state
of being, he no longer identifies himself with the objects of the world. Such a
state of perfection is considered to be the highest. Knowledge leads one from
individual consciousness to universal consciousness. Sadhana leads the
aspirant from his gross self to the subtlemost aspect of his being, and then he
realizes that his real Self is the Self of the universe.
Three qualities function in the universe, and these qualities function in
the same way in the human being. Sattva is the harmonious quality; rajas is
the active and passionate quality; and tamas is slothful. All of the forms and

means in the universe come out of these three gunas, and the gunas
themselves come from the one single source of all, the Lord of life and the
universe. The sun, moon, constellations, and the elements of earth come into
existence from the Lord of life, the source of the universe. Because of these
objects we become aware of the source behind all phenomena: the Lord of
life. They exist because of the Lord, but He does not exist because of the
existence of these objects. That is why it is said, “All these objects are in Me,
yet I am not in them.” All things are in the Lord of life, but He is not in them.

13. This entire world, deluded by three states constituted of gunas, does
not recognize Me as the immutable One beyond them.
14. This divine may a of Mine, consisting of gunas, is difficult to
transcend. Only they who surrender themselves to Me go across this maya.
15. The basest among human beings, the deluded ones, evildoers, do not
surrender to Me, their knowledge having been plundered away by may a as
they have resorted to a demonic aspect.
The whole world is deluded as a result of the illusory power of maya.
Maya means that which exists and yet does not exist. The three gunas create
an illusion for all human beings, and they are not able to see the power
behind the illusion. All the activities of the human being—his mind, action,
and speech—are controlled by the gunas, which motivate him to enjoy the
objects but do not allow him to be aware of the self-existent Reality beyond
all these phenomena. In the Isha Upanishad there is a prayer that says, “O
Lord, remove this glittering disk which has hidden the truth.” This means that
the illusory power (maya) is full of temptations and charms that completely
sway the human mind and senses, creating desire for the objects of the world.
We all know that neither the objects nor the pleasures of the mundane world
are permanent, yet our minds remain deluded in wanting to capture these

pleasures. We suffer because of these delusions. The human mind and senses
remain allured by the charms and temptations of the external world, by maya.
Maya has no existence of its own. It is not any particular being or object
like the sun or moon but an illusion in the cosmos. Those who become aware
of this fact and realize the truth that beyond all delusion lies the source of
perennial light and life, which is self-existent, can cross the mire of delusion.
Those alone who with sincere effort and the grace of God attain constant
consciousness of the self-existent Lord of life cross the delusion of maya.
They have made their minds one-pointed and inward and know the true
nature of the Lord. But the mind that is dissipated and distracted and always
goes out in search of the pleasures of the temporal world cannot comprehend
that state. The mire of delusion created by maya is hard to cross. Maya veils
the faculty of discrimination, judgment, and decision. One is then deluded,
and in fact prefers to remain in that state. Those who have lost this faculty are
called demonic or evil, for they create misery and suffering for themselves
and others. Such people, having demonic attitudes and behavior, commit
harmful acts and destroy knowledge because they are infatuated.
The question arises in every aspirant’s mind: What is maya? The word
maya signifies art, skill, or workmanship. As a potter creates a pitcher out of
a lump of clay by using his skill, so maya with her threefold gunas is able to
create the illusion that is enjoyed by ordinary minds. The lump of clay, after
being given a form by the skill of a potter, involves him in his own creation:
he becomes attached to the pitcher he has created. He was not attached to the
lump of clay but becomes attached after using his skill and fashioning the
clay into a pitcher. Man thus models innumerable varieties of objects for his
sense pleasure and becomes deluded, confused, and miserable. One who lives
under that delusion does not perceive the truth that the pitcher is actually a
lump of clay to which he has given a particular shape and to which he has
become attached. The values that he projects onto the pitcher make him
happy. But he becomes fearful that the pitcher might break, and if it should
break, he becomes unhappy. Because of the virtues of the three gunas, one
has the skill to fashion a lump of clay into a pitcher, but from the attachment
that results come all the emotional problems that consume our energy and
time. When we study this entire process, we find that the three gunas create a
vicious cycle that is difficult to break.
Now let us examine the threefold quality of maya. The human being
goes to the state of sleep because of the predominance of tamas. The moment

he wakes up, rajas is predominant and leads him to activity. Then he likes to
enjoy the sense objects. But when sattva is predominant, one remains in a
state of joy and peace. The aspirant can become aware of the influence of the
gunas in all human activities, mental and physical. He can measure the
progress of his sadhana by observing which guna becomes predominant in his
daily life. When he is sad, disappointed, and distressed, it is the influence of
tamas; when he is active, busy in doing and in wanting to do, it is rajas; when
he is calm and joyous and feels delighted from within, the sattva quality is
predominant. Yogis consciously attain the state of sattva by applying
sushumna with a particular exercise involving the combined effort of
concentration and breathing. During that state one spontaneously lifts his
body consciousness to the higher dimensions of life. Calmness and quietness
reflect a tranquil state in which sattva is predominant.
The threefold quality of maya arises from the source of the life stream,
the Lord of life. But the highest of all, the Lord of all, remains beyond them.
Maya is called divine. It is a power of the Lord and cannot be dispelled by
ordinary austerities and mortifications. Special effort and profound sadhana
alone help to cut the fetters of the bondage created by that delusion. When
human endeavor fails, the sadhaka remembers the Lord in the same way that
the infant cries for his mother’s help. That powerful one-pointed devotion
brings the grace of the Lord to the aid of the sadhaka. When the yogi makes
sincere effort to attain the state of sattva and devotes his sattvic effort to the
Lord, he becomes free from the delusion of maya. The tamasic attitudes of
those who remain in the deluded state, always desiring to enjoy the pleasures
of the senses, create misery for them. Because of their infatuation, they create
darkness for themselves. Such ignorant people actually destroy the great gift
given to human beings by Providence.

16. Four kinds of people, performers of good deeds, devote themselves to
Me, O Arjuna: the distressed, the seeker of knowledge, the seeker of
fulfillment of a wish, and the one who knows, O Bull Among the Bharatas.
17. Of these, the one endowed with knowledge, ever united in yoga with
single-pointed devotion is distinguished. I am most beloved of the one
endowed with wisdom, and he is also My beloved.
18. All these others are excellent, but one endowed with knowledge is My
own self—this is My view. Such a one whose self is joined in yoga is
established in Me, consequently in a state higher than which there is none.
19. At the end of many lifetimes one endowed with knowledge attains
Me, knowing ‘the Indweller is All.’ Such a great-souled one (mahatma) is
very difficult to find.
There are four categories of people who are devoted to the Lord. In the
first category are those who are needy and in distress, who suffer mentally
and physically. They are not successful in attaining wealth in the temporal
world, and they are miserable and suffer from all kinds of diseases. That type
of person worships God to fulfill his mundane desires and has no knowledge
of the nature of the Self. He prays to the Lord to fulfill his desires and does
not pray when his desires are met. That kind of devotee is the most petty one,
yet compared to those who do not pray to God and do not have any
consciousness of higher dimensions of life, those who pray longing to fulfill
their worldly desires are superior because they at least believe in the
existence of God. Their search eventually leads them to realize the
importance of selfless prayer and finally leads them to the realization of the
Self, the highest goal of human life. To believe in God for whatever reason is
far better than non-belief. How unfortunate are those who do not make efforts
to believe in the reality of the Self. They deny their own existence.
The next category of worshipers seeks knowledge with the desire to
know the mystery of human relationships, of life, and of the universe. That
person’s devotion to the Lord does not arise out of misery or failure
experienced in the external world but out of the desire to know the highest
truth. His desire to know is predominant. To satisfy his intellectual curiosity,
he pursues the path of enlightenment. If he pursues it for a long time and
learns to unfold himself to a point where pure reason begins functioning, he
becomes able to discriminate between the mundane and the Absolute. That

class of seekers is definitely superior to the first category of devotees who
pray to God merely because they are distressed, miserable, and unable to
fulfill their desires. Desiring to know the highest truth is superior to longing
to have worldly needs and desires fulfilled.
In the third category are those aspirants who have sharpened their
faculty of discrimination and know the difference between the pure Self and
the not-self, the imperishable and the perishable. Such an aspirant makes
sincere efforts to realize the highest truth. He searches for a competent
teacher and follows the path to enlightenment that is imparted to him. With
the help of meditation, he directs his energies only toward realizing the Self.
He proves to be the highest of all seekers. His devotion does not arise out of
worldly distress, anxiety, or intellectual curiosity. In his search for truth there
lies a purity of heart and mind. Those who have been practicing the path of
light and life in the past start treading the same path again and continue
pursuing their path until they reach the end.
The fourth class is composed of those fortunate ones who have already
attained wisdom. Such an aspirant has realized the real Self, so for him
nothing remains to be attained. He has already attained the state of tranquility
and is superior to those in the other classes that have been described. Such a
jnana yogi is the finest of all. He is dear to the Lord, and the Lord is dear to
him. The man of wisdom is called mahatma. Such high souls are rare and
become torch bearers and examples for all aspirants. Because of these great
mahatmas, the spiritual knowledge flows uninterruptedly.
Though all four classes pray and are devoted to one and the same Lord,
the highest is the realized one who has attained the state of equanimity and
equilibrium. Those in the highest class do not have any desire at all, whereas
the seekers in the other three classes still have desires. Such a great man is
firmly established in his conviction because he already knows the truth. He
knows that this entire universe has come out of the truth. The man of wisdom
can never slip from the heights of attainment. He is steadfast and has attained
oneness with the divine. Therefore he is divine.
When one seriously thinks about life and its purpose, it becomes clear
that one lifetime is not sufficient to attain the ultimate goal. Self-realization is
attained through the effort of many lifetimes. If that effort is uninterrupted,
one is sure to attain his goal.

20. Many, their knowledge plundered away by so many desires, resort to
other deities, undertaking this and that observance, impelled thereto by
their own nature.
21. Whatever form or aspect of mind a devotee wishes to worship with
faith, toward that very form or aspect of Mine I establish his unshaken
devotion.
22. Endowed with that faith, he endeavors to practice the worship of the
same; thereby he gains the fulfillment of those very wishes provided by Me.
23. But the fruit of theirs, whose wisdom is thus limited, comes to an end.
Those who sacrifice to the deities go to the deities. Those who are devoted
to Me come even to Me.
Though the paths are various, the goal is one and the same. Even they
who do not have profound knowledge of human existence and the universe
around them, whose mental horizons have not expanded, and who worship
various gods are benefited because of the ultimate source of light and life, the
only one self-existent truth. This one truth is manifest in millions of ways.
When one devotes his time and prays to one aspect of the truth, he indeed
gains solace and is helped, but the ultimate truth still remains beyond his
vision. Only those who know truth directly become liberated.
The aspirant who has a longing to enjoy the objects of the senses
destroys his knowledge because his longing creates barriers and obstacles for
him. Such an aspirant remains under the control of the three gunas, which
delude his mind. He worships all sorts of objects, experiences, and
achievements in the mundane world.
These verses do not merely refer to gods as we usually think of them.
When one has a strong desire for an object or an achievement, that desire is

inevitably fulfilled. If a desire is powerful enough, it fulfills itself. When one
is devoted to fulfilling a desire, he makes that desire the object of his
devotion, his god. And his devotion toward that God satisfies him, for he
attains what he is seeking. In the Old Testament the first commandment is
“Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” This means that one should not
worship or become devoted to money, possessions, power, fame, or other
mundane attainments. Sri Krishna takes a different perspective and says that
if one worships or devotes himself to mundane objects he is bound to attain
them through God’s grace, but the reward received is only temporary and
mundane. One who is devoted to the material gets only the material; one who
is devoted to wealth gets only wealth. If one does not seek that which is more
abundant and fulfilling and which is equally available, he does not gain the
ultimate reward.
The ordinary person with limited knowledge chooses a symbol, begins
worshipping that symbol, and makes it the object of his devotion. He
performs many rites because the human mind has the tendency to be
dependent on the form and is not able to comprehend the knowledge and
vision of the formless. One who functions from his lower mind cannot have a
vision of the attributeless and formless. Even today many religions believe
that God is a being who fulfills the desires of those who beseech him. No
doubt that helps one to some extent, but still he is not able to break the fetters
and the bondages created by his limited conceptions. The ordinary person
worships gods or believes in the existence of God, but he is not aware that
there exists only one Reality without a second.
Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna that humanity can be divided into four
groups. Some people believe in fulfilling their sense pleasures, others out of
curiosity try to know and believe, and a small number attain truth by
following the path of yoga. But only a fortunate few are Self-realized and are
capable of leading others.
Ordinary men and women think, act, and worship according to the guna
that is predominant in them. Sri Krishna says that one who has no knowledge
of the real Self indulges in a mockery of worship because of his ignorance.
Those who have no knowledge of the eternal presence of the infinite are
infatuated and worship gods without realizing the one truth. But those who do
not worship any image and whose minds have attained a state of tranquility
are truly free.

24. The unwise believe Me, though unmanifest, as having come to
manifestation, not knowing My supreme, immutable, and unexcelled
aspect.
25. I am not vivid to all, veiled by the yoga-maya. This deluded world
does not know Me, who am unborn and immutable.
26. I know all the past and all the present ones, O Arjuna, and all the
future beings. No one, however, knows Me.
27. Through the delusion of the dual opposites which arises through
desire and enmity, O Descendant of Bharata, all beings enter delusion at
the time of birth, O Scorcher of Enemies.
The absolute Truth is not subject to destruction. It is the supreme of all.
The Lord knows all beings in all three times—past, present and future—but
no one knows the Lord. The Lord is hidden behind His own power, and it is
not easy to realize Him. The ignorant do not know this truth because they are
infatuated with the pleasures of the mundane world. They do not understand
that which has the power to manifest Itself as an incarnation. The ignorant are
not capable of understanding the unborn, never-dying One. From desire
springs the pairs of opposites such as misery and joy. Almost everyone is
infatuated by the pairs of opposites and is deluded by them. Those who are
under the influence of the pairs of opposites have no conception of the truth
and therefore are not capable of comprehending the glory of the Lord. Their
minds and senses remain engrossed with sense pleasures, and they do not
even think of improving or unfolding themselves. But those fortunate ones
who are not infatuated and who are free from the pairs of opposites are
liberated. Their whole being remains devoted to the Lord alone.
Contemplation of and meditation on external pleasure leads one to

further delusion, but the aspirant who is conscious of the ultimate reality
meditates and contemplates only on the highest of truth. With the help of
self-discipline, such an aspirant acquires extraordinary power: the power of
supreme knowledge, which is the source of all knowledge. Many aspirants do
not understand the distinction between the manifest and the unmanifest One.
The word avyakta means unknown, unseen, imperceivable. Vyakta, however,
may be perceived with the help of the sense organs. The sadhaka attempts to
go beyond vyakta to attain knowledge of avyakta, but the ignorant have no
power to go beyond the mire of delusion created by the senses. They do not
know if there is anything that exists beyond sense perception. Their minds
remain engrossed in sense pleasures, and they have no comprehension of the
unknown phenomena of life, of the supreme power that is eternal and infinite.
The ignorant think that the ultimate truth is a particular being or has a
particular form; they do not comprehend the whole. To know the whole is
real knowledge, but to think of the whole as being limited or as an individual
being is sheer ignorance.
To regard the infinite as just part of itself is a gross error. As a wave in
the ocean is not the whole ocean, so all the creatures are but fragments of the
one whole. To consider the supreme One as having a form means that one is
thinking of the undivided as being divided. Sun, moon, stars, space, fire,
water, and earth are but mere aspects of the whole; they are only small parts
of the infinite. Instead of meditation on one individual aspect of the universe,
the wise meditate on the supreme fountainhead of life and light from which
proceeds the whole universe. But because of their limited knowledge, the
ignorant ones engage in the worship of gods in various forms. Those whose
minds are dissipated and who lack control and concentration can focus their
minds on forms in the beginning and can eventually be led to the formless.
There are two schools of meditation. One believes in meditation on the
forms, the other on the formless. But since ordinary minds cannot
comprehend meditation of the formless, a form is useful for them in the
primary stage of meditation to help them attain concentration of mind.
Ultimately meditation should go to a deeper level that is beyond forms and
names.

28. But those people of meritorious deeds whose past sin is reaching an
end, they, freed of delusion with regard to the pairs of opposites, devote
themselves to Me with very firm vows of observance.
29. They who, resorting to Me, endeavor for freedom from old age and
death, come to know the entire Brahman, the complete spiritual affairs,
and the entire range of action.
30. They who know Me with reference to the beings, with reference to the
deities, as well as with reference to sacrificial observances, even at the time
of their departure their minds are united in yoga and they know Me.
Perfection can be attained by performing actions skillfully and with full
devotion. When a one-pointed mind has been achieved and all the energies
are directed toward Self-realization, all action becomes a form of worship.
Then the aspirant identifies himself with his essential nature which is truth,
happiness, and bliss. He knows that the worshiped one and the worshiper are
one and the same. All the qualities of the ocean are found in a single drop of
water. Qualitatively they are one and the same. Realizing that truth, the
aspirant fulfills the purpose of his life and becomes perfect. He is no longer
affected by the pairs of opposites.
Those who have made sincere efforts and have completed all endeavors
attain freedom from old age and death. Ordinarily in old age the mind
remains preoccupied; it goes to the old habit grooves that have been created
in one’s past. But when one makes full effort to meditate and contemplate on
the innermost center of his being, he does not suffer from his old patterns.
Death reveals its mystery to him. Thus he knows that one lives after death,
that the Self remains eternal and unchanged, and that it is only the body that
dies. He is not afraid of dying; he remains fearless both here and hereafter.
Truth alone makes one fearless. Many devotees and aspirants make efforts to
remember and maintain awareness of the center of consciousness at the time

of death but are unable to do so because their meditation has not been
strengthened and their minds still flow toward the grooves of their past
habits. But those who have remained constantly aware of the center of
consciousness are, at their hour of departure from this world, fearless, free,
and happy.
Here ends the seventh chapter, in which the mystery of the
unknown and the known is revealed.

Chapter Eight
Knowledge of the Eternal

Arjuna said
1. What is Brahman with reference to the spiritual Self (adhyatman)?
What is karma, O Highest of Persons? What is it with reference to beings
(adhibhuta), and what with reference to the deities (adhidaivata) is it said to
be?
2. What is it with reference to sacrificial observances within this body
(adhiyajna), O Madhu-sudana, and how are You to be known at the hour
of departure by those of controlled selves?

The Blessed Lord said
3. The indestructible syllable, the supreme Brahman, the very
transcendental nature is the inward spiritual Self. The emission, which is
the cause of the production of the aspects of beings, is called karma.

4. The perishable aspect is the one referred to concerning the being, and
the conscious principle Purusha is of the deities. As sacrificial observances
it is I in this body, O Best of the Bodybearers.
At the end of chapter seven, Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that one should
know Brahman, adhyatma, karma, adhibhuta, adhidaivata, and adhiyajna,
and that at the final hour of departure one should contemplate and meditate
on the highest Lord alone. Arjuna does not comprehend the meaning of these
words and wants to understand their profundity.
In the eighth chapter Sri Krishna answers all of Arjuna’s questions. First
he explains that Brahman is the highest of all principles. The supreme
Brahman alone exists and is the source of manifestation. Brahman is eternal
and immutable. It is not subject to change, death, or destruction. Brahman is
not different from the innermost Self of every individual. Brahman is the
liberated state of consciousness. It is the state in which Sri Krishna abides,
and that state of consciousness can also be attained by the aspirant. Those
who have attained a state of tranquility and equanimity have the knowledge
of Brahman.
The word adhyatma is used for the supreme Brahman as it exists in
every individual soul. There are two aspects of Brahman: the unmanifest and
the manifest. As Brahman begins the process of manifestation, It divides
itself into the transcendent subject (adhyatma) and the unmanifest source of
all objects (mula-prakriti). Adhyatma refers to Brahman as the transcendent
subject in every being.
Whatever is done that results in beings coming into existence is called
karma. Karma is the power that brings about the origination of all beings. It is
the creative fire by which life is developed, elevated, and evolved. The
existence of all living beings comes about because of the law of karma. The
transcendent subject (adhyatma), the basis of all objectification (mulaprakriti), and the creative principle (karma) are all aspects of Brahman.
Sri Krishna says that he should be known in each of his aspects. All the
objects that come into being are called bhuta. All the names and forms of the
universe are perishable and subject to destruction. Whatever objects appear to
exist in the material world are only forms of Prakriti, and the term adhibhuta
refers to their perishable nature. In contrast to this, adhidaivata is the
principle of pure consciousness, Purusha, which is everywhere and which is
above all divinities. The term adhiyajna means “myself as sacrifice.” Sri

Krishna as the supreme Lord, the pure consciousness, rules over all sacrifice
and is the recipient of all sacrifice. All sacrifices are directed toward the Self,
and that is called adhiyajna. The sacrifice that is continually taking place in
the body is also directed toward the Self. The Upanishads say that human life
is a long series of sacrifices that should last for at least one hundred years.

5. He who departs remembering Me at the last moment, after leaving the
body, he comes to identify with Me; there is no doubt in this.
6. Remembering whichever aspect of mine as he leaves the body at the
end, he reaches that very aspect, O Son of Kunti, identified and always
nurtured by that aspect.
7. Therefore remember Me at all times, and fight. With your mind and
intelligence surrendered to Me, you will come to Me alone, without doubt.
8. With a mind joined in the yoga of practice, and wandering nowhere
else, contemplating the supreme, divine Person, one goes to Him, O Son of
Pritha.
Verses 5 through 8 explain how the aspirant should prepare himself for
life hereafter. He should not be haunted by thoughts, desires, and attachments
to the mundane world. At the last hour of one’s departure from this world, he
should remember the Lord of life, for one’s last desire determines the course
of his rebirth. If during that time the aspirant thinks only of the Lord, nothing
of the world influences the course of his transition. How can one remember
the Lord at that time? Every great tradition teaches a way to remember the
Lord, either by remembering a mantra, a word, a syllable, or a set of words.
When the pranas (inhalation and exhalation)—which create a bridge between
the conscious and unconscious life, the mortal and immortal parts of life—

abandon their duties, the conscious mind, breath, senses, and body separate
from the unconscious part of life. All the desires, merits, and demerits remain
in the unconscious. One’s prominent desires prompt him to assume a new
garment. That is called rebirth.
During that transition period, remembering a mantra is useful; it enables
the voyage to be comfortable. At the time of death ordinary people remember
their worldly attachments and pleasures. That magnifies the pain and leads
the mind to sorrow. But the aspirant who has clarity of mind remembers the
name of the Lord and thus does not have unpleasant experiences at the time
of departure. When the mantra is remembered consciously, it is recorded by
the unconscious. During the time of departure when the conscious mind fails,
any thought or desire that is prominent in the unconscious leads the
individual according to its nature. It is very important to repeatedly remember
the name of the Lord during one’s lifetime so that the impression created by
repeated remembrance is the strongest impression in the unconscious, for it is
the strongest motivation that becomes the leader. Many aspirants are not
aware of the profound effects of remembering the mantra, but they should
understand that no action remains unrecorded in the unconscious. The student
should not be concerned about consciously noticing a result but should
continue remembering the mantra so that it becomes embedded in the
unconscious. There is no doubt that the aspirant who constantly remembers
the Lord at the time of departure attains liberation.
Many students wonder about life hereafter. After death one does not go
to any hell or heaven but remains in his own habit patterns. Hell and heaven
are merely the creations of one’s own mind and habits. Those who
understand the meaning of life know that the final hour is the deciding factor
for whether one’s voyage to the unknown will be pleasant or unpleasant.
They prepare themselves for that hour. They depart from this world with a
free mind and conscience, enjoying the eternal joy of the infinite. Whatever
state an aspirant habitually remembers, the same he attains after leaving his
body. One who has an auspicious state as his goal will reach it after death,
and he who remembers worldly pleasures will continue to long for those
pleasures after leaving his body. His desires, however, cannot be fulfilled in
the state between death and birth, for then he has no senses and no objects
with which to fulfill his desires. Thus he suffers. Those who are meditators,
however, attain the deep state of tranquility and are never affected by the
desire for worldly pleasure. They attain the state of perfection by identifying

themselves with the Lord, and they finally become one with the Lord.

9. He who contemplates Him who is the master of intuition, the ancient
One, the giver of all commandments, more minute than the minute,
sustainer of all, whose form is beyond thought, having the solar hue,
beyond darkness.
10. At the hour of departure, with an unmoving mind, endowed with
devotion and with the power of yoga, making the prana enter between the
eyebrows properly, he reaches the supreme, divine Person.
11. The indestructible syllable that the knowers of Veda know, that which
the ascetics, free of attachments, enter, seeking which they practice
celibacy, I shall teach you that word briefly.
12. Closing all the doors of the body and retaining the mind in the heart,
placing the prana in the crown of the head, established in the concentration
of yoga—
13. OM, this is Brahman consisting of a single, indestructible syllable.
He who, enunciating it and contemplating it, goes forth abandoning his
body, he reaches the supreme state.
The Lord is omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent. He is the most
ancient seer, and there is nothing that He does not know. He is the controller
and ruler of all. He is extremely subtle and is not visible through the eyes of
ordinary human minds. To meditate on Him is difficult. He is full of light
without any tinge of darkness. At the time of departure one should remain in
deep meditation on the Lord with full devotion and one-pointedness.

Sri Krishna gives a brief explanation of the practice of meditation that
incorporates a subtle breathing method. When the aspirant learns to be still in
a steady posture, he finds that the incoming and outgoing breaths draw the
attention of his mind. Meditation can only be profound if sushumna is
applied. Sushumna is a joyous state of mind in which the meditator
spontaneously attains an unusual calmness without any external distraction.
One of the signs and symptoms of this state of mind is that the breath flows
freely and equally through both nostrils. In the ordinary state, one of the
nostrils remains predominant.
Breath and mind are interdependent and are in the habit of reacting
simultaneously. When the breath is calm and serene, the mind attains a state
of joy. The aspirant should focus his mind at the space between the two
eyebrows and should learn to visualize the light of life, through which one
sees, senses, and knows. When his meditation is strengthened the light
becomes more and more clear, and he finally reaches the source of light and
life. The yogi who regularly practices meditation for a long time without
interruptions in his practice attains that state. With the desire to attain the
center of consciousness within, he observes complete celibacy. Here celibacy
does not refer to practice only on a physical level but should be performed
with mind, action, and speech.
The yogi who learns to meditate by applying sushumna and
incorporating the sacred syllable OM can attain a state of equilibrium. It is
interesting to note that all mantras cannot be adjusted to the inhalation and
exhalation process. OM is a smooth sound and does not create jerks or
irregular rhythms in the breath. Yogis remember that sound all the time; it
has been praised by the Vedas, the most ancient scriptures in the library of
man.
Those who cast off their mortal bodies remembering the Lord definitely
reach the highest state. But one should not wait for the last hour of departure
and learn to meditate only during the last days of his life. The wise person
knows that in reality one experiences death every moment. We die millions
of times in one lifetime, and millions of times we are born. Every moment
that passes by is like a moment of death. One moment dies and another
moment is born; one experience dies and another comes into being. Death
precedes birth and birth precedes death, yet we experience a continuity of
consciousness through these deaths and births. In a similar way the pure
consciousness remains through the deaths and births of the physical body.

The human being is on a pilgrimage. His goal is the eternal abode,
where he finds perfect happiness, peace, and bliss. The ignorant ones who
consider this earth their permanent abode are deluded. Every moment of life
until one reaches his eternal abode is precious. Therefore one should
remember the Lord in every moment. That practice is called ajapajapa.
Those who remember the name of the Lord in every breath of their lives are
the fortunate few. When a student learns to remember the name of God in
silence with a one-pointed mind and strengthens that habit, he can continue
practicing anywhere and everywhere he goes. Thus ajapa japa leads one to
constant awareness of the Self, which helps him during the period of
departure.

14. He who, without turning his mind to any other, remembers Me
incessantly—to that yogi, who is ever united in yoga, I am easily available,
O Son of Pritha.
15. Upon reaching me, the great-souled one, having attained the
supreme fulfillment, no longer comes to rebirth, which is an impermanent
abode of sorrows.
16. All the way to the realm of Brahman, all the worlds revolve again
and again, O Arjuna. Upon reaching Me, however, O Son of Kunti, there is
no more rebirth.
When the aspirant analyzes his existence in this world, he realizes that
there is nothing permanent here. He focuses his mind on the Lord alone and
remembers Him all the time. That constant awareness gives him freedom
from the dissipation of the mind, and then he establishes himself in the
consciousness of the eternal Self. Such a yogi is not born again and again; he
is not subject to the rounds of deaths and births. The accomplished yogi is not
required to come back again, for he has already attained liberation. The law

of death and rebirth is not applicable to him.

17. People who know day and night know that the day of Brahma
extends to a thousand aeons, and the night extends to a thousand aeons
also.
18. All the manifest entities arise from the unmanifest upon the coming
of the day, and upon the coming of the night they dissolve into that very
thing called the unmanifest.
19. This aggregate of beings and elements, born again and again, is then
dissolved at the coming of the night, quite helplessly, O Son of Pritha, and
it is produced again upon the arrival of the day.
There are four yugas or ages: Krita, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali. The four
together are called a mahayuga, a great age. One mahayuga consists of
4,326,000, years. One thousand mahayugas make one day of Brahma, and the
night of Brahma is of the same duration. The day and night together are
called a kalpa.* Three hundred and sixty such units of day and night make
one year of Brahma, and one hundred such years is the life of Brahma. With
each day of Brahma the universe comes into being, and at the close of that
day all beings merge into the unmanifest Prakriti. That process goes on
eternally.
These verses explain that which physics and astronomy are trying to
discover through external means: when the universe began, how it evolved,
and if and when it will be annihilated. According to this view the universe
goes through an endless cycle of creation and annihilation. Each cycle takes a
vast length of time as measured by the human frame of reference but a much
shorter time from the perspective of a more comprehensive state of

consciousness. Physics has introduced to the modern world the concept that
time is relative, but now we see that such a conception existed long ago in the
cosmology of the ancient Vedic scriptures.
In these verses Sri Krishna makes Arjuna aware of the grand scale of the
universe and the relative insignificance of all that Arjuna is attached to in his
small world. These verses also give an inkling of the vastness of the universe
over which Sri Krishna presides.

20. But beyond that primordial unmanifest Prakriti is another eternal
unmanifest Entity who does not perish when all the beings perish.
21. The unmanifest is called the indestructible syllable that is said to be
the supreme status, upon attaining which they no longer return to the
world. That is My supreme abode.
22. He is the transcendent Self (Purusha) to be attained through
devotion distracted toward none other, inside whom dwell all the beings
and by whom is all this spanned and pervaded.
The time comes when the entire universe is annihilated by the great
design of the Absolute. When everything that is manifest is destroyed, one
unchanging principle remains that is never destroyed. That principle is called
Akshara (immutable). It is the highest abode of the Absolute. The aspirant
who has secured the knowledge of and attained that abode is no longer
subject to birth and death. That eternal, unchanging, and everlasting principle
is the highest goal of the aspirant. In that dwell all beings. It is the
unmanifested pure Consciousness that is eternal and changeless, whereas all
else goes through a process of birth and death. That unmanifest Reality is
beyond the process of Prakriti and does not perish when the universe
perishes. It is never changing and is everlasting, eternal, and infinite.

23. The time, departing in which the yogis return or do not return, I shall
tell you of that time division, O Bull among the Bharatas.
24. Fire, light, the day, the moonlit fortnight, the six months of the
northern solstice—departing in that time, the people who know Brahman
go to Brahman.
25. Smoke, night, the dark lunar fortnight, the six months of the
southern solstice—there the yogi attaining the lunar light returns.
26. These white and dark directions of the world are said to be perennial.
By one he no longer returns, by the other he returns again.
Sri Krishna teaches Arjuna the knowledge of the two paths that deal
with the art and science of death and dying. What is the right time to depart
from this mortal world? Those who are Self-realized cast off their bodies in
the daytime during the bright half of the month while the sun is in its northern
course. They then attain Brahman. Those who follow the path of action drop
their bodies at a nocturnal hour during the dark half of the month while the
sun is in its southern course, and they are reborn again. The path of those who
are Self-realized is called the path of light, whereas the path of those who die
during the six months when the sun is in the southern course is called the path
of smoke. Both paths exist eternally, but one leads to emancipation and the
other to rebirth. The words agni, jyoti, shukla are applied to the bright half of
a month and indicate the light that shows the path. The words dhuma, ratri,
krishna are applied to the dark half of the month and indicate darkness or
ignorance. These verses do not just refer to the external universe but to the
internal processes occurring within each person.
There are two paths: the path of good (selfless service) and the path of
evil (selfishness). By following the path of good and dedicating all the fruits

of one’s actions, one remains liberated in the midst of performing his duty.
But following the path of pleasure and living a selfish life leads to sorrow and
pain. The path of good is the path of freedom, whereas the path of selfishness
causes births and deaths.
According to yoga there are three paths. The path of pingala (the right
breath) is the path of the sun, light, and day; the path of ida (the left breath) is
that of night and darkness. The yogi who knows how to change from ida to
pingala and from pingala to ida has complete control over the course of these
two breaths. Such a yogi knows how to apply sushumna and thus attains a
state of tranquility, of samadhi. That is the third path. Only two of these paths
are mentioned in the Bhagavad Gita: the path of light and the path of
darkness. The yogi who follows the path of the sun or light does not have to
stumble through the dark path of ignorance. But one who does not have
knowledge and does not practice yoga must go through the dark path. In his
desire for the mundane objects of the world, his vision is obscured and his
eyes remain blindfolded. His life is controlled by the gunas, for he does not
practice the path of self-control. But the great yogi has self-control, and
following the path of light, he reaches the highest abode of Brahman. The
ignorant man, however, is subject to rebirth and suffers as a result of his
selfishness.
The ordinary person does not have control over the time he departs. He
is swayed by Prakriti (the three gunas), which determines the course of his
life. But the yogi has profound control over his senses and mind. He can
choose to cast off his body according to his wish, for he already understands
life and its values thoroughly. For the yogi, dropping the body is just like
taking off a garment. He does not remain attached to his body or to any other
relationship related to the body. When the body is no longer a fit instrument,
he decides to cast it off according to his will. The ordinary person does not
have such a dynamic will or knowledge of the relationship of the body with
the Self. The path of light, knowledge, and sun is the path the great ones
tread.

27. Knowing these two paths, no yogi is ever confused. Therefore, O
Arjuna, be united in yoga in all times.
28. The fruit of merit that has been stated with regard to the Vedas, the
sacrifices, ascetic endeavors, and charities—the yogi surpasses it all,
knowing this, and attains the primal and supreme peace.
One who has knowledge of both paths—the path of light and the path of
darkness—is never deluded by the darkness, by ignorance, for he knows the
consequences of both paths. Such a yogi is never trapped by the charms,
temptations, and allurements of the external world. Every moment of his life
is devoted to the path of yoga. He never abandons the practices of yoga, so
there is no chance of his downfall. He follows the path of yoga with full faith
and a one-pointed mind. Yoga is an art and science that means skill in action,
equanimity with regard to pleasure and pain, and freedom from attachment to
mundane enjoyments. One who follows yoga is never deluded.
Scriptural knowledge is helpful only to a certain extent, but the true yogi
attains direct knowledge, which helps him to go beyond to the heart of the
teachings of the Vedas. He is definitely superior to one who follows the
scriptures and performs sacrifices according to the instructions given in the
scriptures. Direct knowledge alone leads to salvation. Two categories of
yogis have been explained here. Those fortunate ones who have no
attachments and who have attained the knowledge of skillful action are
definitely superior to those who do their duties by performing daily rites and
living in the world. The yogi of the first category attains the highest state of
tranquility and equanimity and remains unaffected by the influences of the
external world. He is never disturbed. Sri Krishna leads Arjuna to this path of
skillful, selfless action and non-attachment.
Thus ends the eighth chapter, in which the knowledge of the
eternal is explained.

Chapter Nine
Knowledge of the Royal and Secret Path

The Blessed Lord said
1. To you who are free of all intolerance I shall tell this secret-most
knowledge together with its realization, knowing which, you will be freed
from all that is impure.
2. The royal science, the royal secret, this is the unexcelled purifier, the
attainment of which is evident, meritorious, immutable, and very easy to
accomplish.
3. The persons not having faith in this law (dharma), O Scorcher of
Enemies, not finding Me, keep returning on the path of death and the
worldly cycles.
Real knowledge and higher knowledge are described separately here.
Knowledge relating to the factual world is considered to be real knowledge,
yet there is another, higher state of knowledge in which one attains complete
freedom from all pain and misery. Before one attains the highest state of
knowledge, he should have knowledge of the real. Real here means that
which is subject to sense perception. When one comprehends the nature of

the temporal and evident reality, he discovers that all the objects of the
external world are ever changing. Then he wants to understand the law
underlying all those changes, for he knows that there must be something
permanent beyond those changes. He distinguishes between two phenomena:
one is subject to change and the other is eternal.
Sri Krishna imparts the secret knowledge of the eternal to Arjuna, but
this does not imply that he is being prejudiced in favor of Arjuna. The word
guhya, used in the first verse, means hidden, unrevealed, and not
comprehended by ordinary minds. But actually there is no secret in the path
of knowledge. Anyone who desires that knowledge can attain it, but one who
is engrossed in worldly pleasures and whose mind is dissipated and distracted
does not have the power to understand and assimilate the higher knowledge.
Thus it remains a secret to him. These verses say that the higher knowledge,
the secrets of the royal path, are imparted only to those whose minds are onepointed, who follow the path of yoga, and who have firmly decided to
dedicate their lives to attaining the highest knowledge. A competent teacher
instructs his student according to the ability of the student’s mind. When the
student advances on the path, the teacher goes on revealing further secrets to
him that he cannot impart to beginners.
The knowledge that is expounded in this chapter is called raja vidya
(royal knowledge). There is a difference between royal knowledge and other
paths. The road that leads one to the royal house is clean and clear and guides
the aspirant. The milestones and road markers help him understand how far
he has travelled on the path and how far and in which direction he has yet to
tread. Modern students tend to follow this path, for it is a highly systematic
approach. If one continues to faithfully follow this path, he finally reaches the
royal palace where the king resides in his splendid eternal glory.
There is another meaning that can be derived from this verse. Raja vidya
is the vidya (knowledge) that helps one to know the secrets of governing a
kingdom. How should a raja (king) conduct himself and govern the kingdom?
How can an individual govern the kingdom of life within and without? In
both situations the state of equanimity should be attained first, for without it
establishing self-government within or ruling the masses outside is
impossible. Leaders should have profound knowledge of life within and
without before they assume the duty of leading the masses. One who has not
established control and mastery over himself is not capable of leading others.
He cannot do justice to his task if he has not yet attained the state of

equanimity.
With direct experience the yogi learns to understand all the laws that
govern the city of life. He also knows the eternal principle that remains deep
seated in the inner chamber of his being. The yogi learns to govern the city of
life and becomes a master, whereas the ordinary person has no knowledge
and skill to do so. He is governed and controlled by the forces of nature, and
he always wants to enjoy the pleasures of the world. He is enslaved by his
desires. One who does not follow the path of yoga but instead seeks to enjoy
the fruits of his actions is subject to birth and death. It is as though he is born
and dies without any purpose.
In this chapter Sri Krishna expounds the profound knowledge that will
help Arjuna understand his internal organization so that he can be free from
delusion. Sri Krishna first imparts the knowledge of the temporal and real
world and then leads Arjuna to the higher knowledge that can only be
attained directly and not through any other source. Knowledge of the
scriptures and teachings of the sages do inspire us, but direct knowledge
alone enables one to attain the highest wisdom.

4. All this is pervaded by Me whose form is unmanifest. All beings are
dwelling in Me; I am not dwelling in them.
5. Nor are the beings dwelling within Me. See My yoga of sovereignty.
My Self is the bearer of beings, nurturing the beings, yet not dwelling in the
beings.
6. As the great wind dwelling in the sky reaches everywhere, so all the
beings are dwelling within Me—be certain of this.
That which is self-existent, complete, and full in itself does not need any
support. The whole universe has arisen from the unmani-fested power of the
Lord. The entire administration of this universe is governed efficiently by the

Lord. All beings rely on that one power, but that power does not rely on any
being, for it is independent in and of itself. It nourishes and protects all
beings yet is not bound up in them. Atman is the very cause and source of the
activities of all beings. As the air exists in space and moves about in space, so
all things have their existence and movement within the Lord.
In an organization there are many administrative officers, but above all
these governing authorities there is one who has supreme authority to govern
the entire organization. Similarly in the city of life there are many governing
powers, but over all is Ishvara. In both the individual and the universe, the
highest Self is the presiding divinity that directs and protects the universe and
the individual life. The same governing principle is in the individual as is in
the universe.

7. All beings, O Son of Kunti, come to My own primordial nature,
Prakriti, at the end of a cycle (kalpa); and again at the beginning of the
next I release them in various forms.
8. Controlling My primordial nature, Prakriti, I emit again and again
this entire aggregate of beings and elements, which is helpless because of
the control of Prakriti.
9. Nor do these acts bind Me, O Arjuna, as I remain neutral, above them,
unattached to those karmas.
10. With Me as supervisor, primordial nature brings forth the animate
and the inanimate world. Through this process as the cause, O Son of
Kunti, the world keeps changing and revolving.
According to the Vedic scriptures, half a kalpa (day of Brahma) lasts for
4,326,000,000 human years. That is the time period from the manifestation to

the dissolution of the universe. When the universe is dissolved, all beings
return to the primordial nature for aeons, and manifestation then begins again
with the next half kalpa. This cycle goes on endlessly. The pure Self presides
over the manifestation of Prakriti, of the universe with all its forms and
names.
At the time of both dissolution and manifestation, the pure Self remains
unaffected by actions performed by its primordial nature, Prakriti. The pure
Self uses Prakriti to manifest the universe. The primordial nature manifests
both the animate and inanimate. During the manifestation and dissolution, all
beings are helplessly swept up into the grand process. Ultimately the power
over all beings rests with the Self. The process of manifestation occurs so that
the beings that are manifest may elevate their consciousness and ultimately
realize their identity with the universal Self. In Verse 10 the word suyate is
used. It comes from the root “su”, meaning to bring forth or to bring about
prosperity. Thus the Self brings about the prosperity of all that is manifest.

11. Only the foolish attribute to Me a lesser station when I assume
human bodies—not knowing My supreme aspect, which is the great Lord
of all beings.
12. Of vain expectations, with vain actions, their knowledge in vain,
devoid of wisdom, they have resorted to the enticing, demonic, and evil
nature.
When there is a great need the Lord assumes a human form to help
human beings attain awareness of the Supreme. In his human disguise the
Lord seems to act like a human being, and ordinary people take Him as such.
They are unable to appreciate His divine qualities that express themselves in
His human form. Those who are confused and deluded do not understand and
accept the presence of the Lord in a human body. Even for the wise it is
difficult to comprehend how the finite vessel carries the infinite within, how

the Lord can resort to a human body that moves about in this world. Many
people disregard Him, and some even despise Him. What He stands for
threatens deluded people who are infatuated with the objects and pleasures of
the mundane world. They wish to cling to their values and attachments, so
they react venomously to any kind of teaching that puts forth a contrary way
of living. Thus many of the great teachers of the world who advocated nonattachment and love were assassinated by those who frantically clung to the
world. The worldly person stands for everything that is opposed to the
bringers of light, and the bringers of light stand in opposition to the values of
the worldly person.
The royal power that resides in every human being is very subtle and
invisible and cannot be grasped by sense perception. That power is superior
to all other powers. It dwells in every living creature from the minutest to the
largest. The ignorant do not recognize and acknowledge that power of
powers. In their deluded condition they despise the Lord by despising other
human beings. But truth is always victorious. Their longings and actions
eventually prove to be in vain because they are attached and resort to evil.
They continue to act foolishly and wrongly, and thus create sorrow and
misery for themselves. They are finally brought down by their own actions.
It is a law of Providence that the ignorant eventually suffer because their
actions are motivated by the desire to fulfill their selfish ends. Selfishness
contracts the human personality; it does not allow it to expand. But the law of
life is expansion, and one who learns to expand his individual consciousness
to the universal consciousness by being selfless and non-attached finds
enjoyment in establishing himself in his true nature, which is peace,
happiness, and bliss.

13. The great-souled ones, however, resorting to the divine nature, devote
themselves to Me with their minds on no other, knowing Me as the

immutable origin of all beings and elements.
14. Always glorifying Me and endeavoring with firmness of observances
and vows, always bowing with devotion, ever joined in yoga, they worship
Me.
15. Others through the sacrificial observances in knowledge, in unity
and multiplicity, worship Me in various ways, who am facing in all
directions.
Great men meditate and contemplate on the divine and thus attain a state
of wisdom in which they identify themselves with divinity, and their nature
becomes divine. Their minds remain one-pointed in the knowledge that the
Lord is the first cause of all beings and is imperishable. With one-pointed
devotion they dedicate their minds, actions, and speech to the Lord alone, and
they serve the Lord through their pure devotion. They have a single desire to
attain the goal of human life. All of their energies are thus directed toward the
Lord. They are resolute in their disciplined way of living, and they practice
discipline in all aspects of life. They see the Lord everywhere and in
everyone. And they salute everyone because they know that the Lord dwells
in every being.
There are others who perform sacrifices in the form of knowledge. Such
a yogi surrenders all that he knows with his limited mind; he empties himself
and opens himself to divine wisdom. Knowledge is a means to attain the goal
of life. The wealth of a yogi is his knowledge; he has nothing but knowledge.
He has no desires, wants, or attachments. In the path of self surrender, one
surrenders all that he has, and the yogi has only his knowledge to surrender.
Thus the yogi sacrifices his knowledge and becomes one with the Absolute.
He realizes the absolute one without a second. He does not go to a state of
unconsciousness but remains fully conscious, identifying himself with the
center of pure consciousness. That is the most profound state of wisdom and
not a state of unconsciousness, as some modern psychologists assume.
There are others who serve the Lord in various ways. Some perform
their duties skillfully with full devotion and with an attitude of selfless
service. They follow the spiritual path with great determination. Such great
people always work for the prosperity of all beings. Great men and mahatmas
know the power of the Absolute to be the means by which society can
prosper. Maintaining harmonious attitudes, they perform selfless actions for
the well being of all people, and they are always enthusiastic in the spirit of

selfless service. These great people are always modest, saintly, and generous.
They always work for the welfare of both the individual and society.

16. I am the sacrificial act, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering given to
the saintly ancestors, I am the herb of oblation, I am the mantra, I am the
clarified butter, I am the fire, and I am the act of burning the offering.
17. I am the father of this world, mother, sustainer, grandfather, the one
to be known, the purifier, OM, Rig-Veda, Sama-Veda, as well as YajurVeda.
18. I am the goal, nurturer, master, witness, dwelling, refuge, friend,
origin, dissolution, place, pledge, the imperishable seed.
19. I scorch; I release the rain and hold it back also. I am the principle
of immortality as well as death, existence as well as non-existence, O
Arjuna.
The Lord is the self-existent reality. He is never born and therefore is
not subject to change, death, or decay. He remains the same in the past,
present, and future. The origin and dissolution of the universe is all within
Him. He is both immortal and mortal. He exists and yet does not exist.
Nothing exists without His existence. Therefore He is everything.
When a ritual is performed and a sacrifice is offered, the collection of
herbs used for the offering, the mantras, the clarified butter to be offered to
the fire, and the act of offering are all different forms of the same principle:
Brahman. The dedication, the offering, the fire, the oblation offered, and the
one who offers are all Brahman. The giver, the enjoyer, the food, and the
eater are nothing else but Brahman. Although objects in the world seem to be
different from one another, they are in fact various aspects of the same

Reality. As various kinds of ornaments are made out of the same gold metal,
so the underlying principle of different forms, names, and objects of the
world is one and the same.
The Lord is the father and mother of this universe. The universe arises
from Him, it is sustained by Him, and it is finally absorbed into Him alone.
The highest Lord is OM; the syllable OM is the designator of the Lord. The
phrase avati iti OM means “one who protects is called OM.” Only the Lord
protects, and no one else. All four Vedas—Rig, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva—
praise the same supreme Lord. They are also aspects of the Lord. The fire,
sun, moon, stars, wind, water, and earth are but forms that have come from
one absolute reality. The aspirant should be constantly aware of only one
reality though he experiences that Reality in various names and forms. When
one becomes aware of the unity in diversity, he realizes the pure Self, the Self
of all.

20. The master of three sciences (vidyas) who drink soma and whose sin
is purified, having performed sacrifices, seek to reach heaven. They,
reaching the meritorious world of the king of gods, enjoy the celestial
pleasures of gods in heaven.
21. They, having enjoyed that vast, celestial world, upon the exhaustion
of merit, enter the world of mortals, thus resorting to the law of threefold
existence. Desiring desires, they remain in the cycles of coming and going.
22. Those people, however, who having no other, worship contemplating
Me, I bear their prosperity in this world and the next as they are ever joined
to Me in yoga.
Those who enjoy the objects of the world and desire to have the same

enjoyment in heaven perform good deeds. Good deeds like charity, sacrifice,
and austerities are no doubt superior to selfish deeds. But reaping the fruits of
one’s actions, even if the actions are good, brings only momentary happiness.
One who performs good deeds enjoys the fruits of his actions in the yonder
world, but even heavenly enjoyments do not bring everlasting happiness.
After experiencing joys in the yonder world, one is reborn again and returns
to the mortal world. But the aspirant who is fully committed to Selfrealization devotes his whole life to the Lord alone, desiring neither worldly
pleasures nor heavenly joys. And the Lord looks after and protects those who
are totally absorbed in Him. Their happiness never diminishes; it is
everlasting.
The Vedas expound three different vidyas: sukta vidya (knowledge of
good utterances and thoughts), yajur vidya (knowledge of sacrificial acts),
and sama vidya (knowledge of meditation and devotion). The aspirant who
wishes to obtain the objects of his enjoyment makes efforts with good
thoughts, good actions, meditation, and devotion to increase those pleasures.
Such an aspirant is called a sakama (desiring) worshipper. The vast majority
of aspirants worship and perform devotional practices and various types of
rituals and sacrifices in order to secure specific desires. In today’s world most
people pray to God to fulfill their wants. They worship God to secure the fruit
that will give them enjoyment. Whatever good they do in the world is to
secure objects that bring pleasure, and they aspire to have pleasure in heaven
as well. That is called sakama upasana, devotion with a motive.
In ancient times aspirants performed various kinds of sacrifices for the
sake of prosperity, for the sake of the common good, or to fulfill desires for
earthly enjoyments. Some aspirants performed a special kind of ritual called
soma sacrifice. Those who used to drink soma wanted their mundane desires
fulfilled. In ancient times soma sacrifice was performed as a ritual, and the
preparations were done with austerities. From the very beginning the ritual
was performed with a single motive in mind, which helped the participants to
concentrate on the specific motive for which the ritual was performed. Much
has been written in the Vedic scriptures about soma: the way it was obtained,
prepared, and used while performing sacrifice. It is said that soma is a creeper
found in the higher mountains and that when its juice is extracted, it creates a
delightful intoxication and stimulation in the mind. The ancients knew a
profound way to extract the juice of the soma creeper and often used it in
their rituals. It has been said that soma has the capacity to help the aspirant

make his mind concentrated by bringing about a supersensual joy.
The yogic method of drinking soma is entirely different and unique, and
only a fortunate few yogis know how to derive soma from within and thus
remain elevated in their spiritual endeavors. When the yogi applies khechari
mudra by inserting his tongue upward behind the roof of the palate, from
there he tastes the soma or nectar that is everflowing from Brahma randhra, a
cavity in the crown of the head. With the help of that nectar, the yogi
prolongs the span of his life. Those who do not know how to take that nectar
remain brutish because that ever-flowing nectar is then taken by the
kundalini. That is why the primal force in the human body, kundalini,
remains intoxicated and asleep. Depriving kundalini of that nectar, the yogi
consciously drinks it himself. When the primal force, kundalini, does not
receive the nectar, she wakes up and ascends through all the chakras to the
final abode at sahasrara chakra. Then all that has been unconscious and
unknown comes forward, and one attains the knowledge of unity. This is one
of the rarest practices experienced by yogis. It requires an accomplished
yogic pose and bandhas (locks) along with khechari mudra. This method of
taking soma leads the yogi to a state of divine intoxication in which he is
aware of the Self only. The external way of extracting soma from herbs is far
inferior to this method.
The ancient soma has been compared to the natural and synthetic
hallucinogenics used today such as mescaline, peyote, and LSD. Though
these are different from soma, they may well be in the same family of
hallucinogens and may produce similar results. People today take such drugs
for various purposes, and their experiences match their purposes as well as
vividly bringing forth latent impressions from the unconscious. If one is
preoccupied with sensory pleasure, such pleasure is greatly heightened by
hallucinogens. And if one is inclined toward spiritual experiences, it is those
experiences that are heightened. Except for the use of peyote by American
Indians, today there is no systematic ritual to direct the hallucinogenic
experience along beneficial lines, though modern experimenters have
attempted to develop ritualized and guided hallucinogenic sessions with that
purpose in mind.
There is considerable controversy today about whether hallucinogens
are beneficial or harmful. Arguments have been put forth for both the positive
and negative effects of their use. It is true that psychoactive drugs can lead
one to intense concentration on a single object, and that concentration can

lead one to a vivid exploration of the unconscious, to altered states of
consciousness, to a sense of transcending time, and to the awareness of the
illusory nature of one’s ordinary mode of experiencing. One then sees that his
ordinary reality is insubstantial and only a relative reality. Yet one may ask,
as vivid as these experiences might be, are they genuine or merely
hallucinations? Are they the same as those experiences of the yogis who
develop concentration and a one-pointed mind through their own efforts? It
seems that hallucinogens merely bring forth that which is already in one’s
unconscious mind. They give one a glimpse of supersensual realms and of the
powers and forces that underlie the material world experienced by the senses.
But such drugs cannot lead one beyond his already developed capacities to
know, comprehend, and enjoy the subtle realms and underlying truths. And
they cannot lead one beyond manifestation to experience the unmanifest
Brahman.
While hallucinogens may help one to become less identified with the
waking reality and to become aware of alternate realities, one who uses them
may pay a great price for ingesting them. The experience itself gives a shock
to the nervous system, and if one is not prepared for such experiences, he can
become emotionally disturbed. The intense energy released through such
experiences drains one and subsequently leads him toward a tamasic state,
from which it takes one some time to recover his energy. Repeated use may
lead one to become “burned out,” depressed, and unable to perform his
actions in the world. Thus he does not accomplish the purpose of his life. He
becomes passive and dependent on such experiences and in between slips
back to a state of inertia and lethargy.
There is no shortcut to Self-realization. The path must be followed with
determination. Through self-discipline one must attain non-attached action,
meditation, and contemplation. Actions performed with motives or desires do
not lead to everlasting happiness. Yogis therefore devote their whole lives to
performing actions without any desire to reap the fruits of their actions. Such
great yogis lead society and live for the welfare of others, for they do not
have any selfish desires.

23. Even those devotees of other deities who sacrifice endowed with faith,
they too, O Son of Kunti, sacrifice to Me alone, even though in an
inappropriate manner.
24. I alone am the receiver of the offerings of all sacrifices, and I alone
am their master. However, they do not recognize Me as such and therefore
they slip from Reality.
25. Those whose vows are directed toward gods go to the gods. Those
whose vows are addressed to the ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who
sacrifice to spirits go to those spirits. Those who sacrifice to Me come to
Me.
In any way one worships, whether it be to any god, deity, or other aspect
of Brahman, he in fact worships Brahman alone. All worship, ritual, and
prayer are offered to the one Brahman only, for Brahman alone exists without
a second. All the reverence and respect shown by the worshipper is actually
shown to Brahman. But the ignorant who do not recognize Brahman fall back
to the world because of their ignorance. A worshipper identifies himself with
the worshipped one. Those who worship spirits identify themselves with the
nature of spirits, whereas those who worship Brahman identify with the
nature of the Lord.
When a student starts seeking, he wants to try all the methods of
sadhana mentioned in the scriptures. He does not have the patience to steadily
practice one path but changes his path every now and then. Some of the
ignorant ones even worship spirits because they do not have knowledge of
the absolute Truth. These verses contain a warning to all seekers that they
should carefully understand the various paths and select the pure and clear
path that leads to Brahman alone. It is important for aspirants to select a valid
and profound path so that they reach the highest Brahman. A competent
teacher or yogi can help the student select the best path for him to follow.

26. Whoever offers Me a leaf, flower, fruit, or water, with devotion—that
gift of a person of controlled self, offered with devotion, I accept.
27. Whatever you do, sacrifice, or give, whatever austerities you perform,
O Son of Kunti, surrender that as an offering unto Me.
28. Thus you will be freed from the bondages of actions whose fruits are
beautiful or ugly; your self, united in the yoga of renunciation, liberated,
will reach Me.
The Lord accepts any offerings no matter how insignificant—even a
leaf, flower, fruit, or a small amount of water—if it is given with full
devotion. This does not mean that aspirants should use only these objects for
worship. It means that which is important is the feeling of devotion. The Lord
does not need anything, for everything already belongs to Him. Offerings are
only expressions of devotion.
Those who offer the fruits of their actions to others without any selfish
motivation, no matter how big or small the fruits, are making offerings to the
Lord. Learning to give is a great virtue. It is as good for oneself as it is for
others. By offering fruits, one learns giving and is benefited in two ways: he
practices non-attachment and acknowledges the presence of the Lord in
others. Thus giving is a step toward non-attachment and at the same time
acknowledges the presence of God in all beings.
Verse 26 teaches the aspirant to give or offer whatever he can according
to his capacity. Those who acquire this habit cannot stop giving, and finally
they give all that they have as an offering to the Lord. Giving and giving up
bring one and the same result. These two virtues are the highest of all and
help the aspirant in self-unfoldment. Any selfless action performed is a
devotion to the Lord.
When the aspirant dedicates everything to the Lord and directs all his
energy with mind, action, and speech to the Lord alone, his actions and the

fruits of his actions no longer bind him. Actions performed as worship to the
Lord do not create bondage. Great men solely dedicate their lives and
perform all their actions for the selfless service of mankind. They do not ever
experience bad or good fruits of their actions because they live for the service
of the Lord performed through service to mankind.

29. I am alike to all beings; no one is hated or beloved of Me. However,
those who devote themselves to Me with devotion, they are in Me; I am also
in them.
30. Even if a person of very bad conduct devotes himself to Me following
no other, he should be considered only saintly; he is embarked on right
determination.
31. Very quickly he becomes a person whose self is virtuous and attains
eternal peace. O Son of Kunti, do know for certain! My devotee does not
perish.
32. Making themselves depend on Me, even the lowly born as well as
women, traders, and servants reach the supreme status—
33. How much more so the meritorious brahmanas, devotees, and royal
sages. Having come to this transient, unhappy world, do devote yourself to
Me.
Sri Krishna continues teaching Arjuna that the real Self maintains an

attitude of evenness toward all beings. The supreme Brahman is never partial
in any way. It has neither hatred nor favor for anyone. The aspirant who
devotes his life to Brahman alone remains in Brahman consciousness, and
Brahman dwells in him. When the yogi attains the height of tranquility
beyond body, breath, senses, and mental consciousness and maintains
constant consciousness of Brahman within himself, he realizes that there is
none who is a friend to him and none whom he can hate. For he has gone
beyond the pairs of opposites and has attained the state of evenness. His life
is completely transformed because he realizes the omnipresence of Brahman
within himself and himself in Brahman. It is just like a river meeting the
ocean. When a river meets the ocean, it becomes the ocean. Constant
consciousness of Brahman leads the yogi to attain such a state.
History reveals that many people of ill conduct were able to liberate
themselves by becoming solely devoted to the Lord. Many such people after
complete self-transformation became well known and respected sages.
Having resolved all of their conflicts, even illbehaved men can attain the
height of equilibrium. Therefore everyone has the opportunity to reform,
improve, and unfold himself. That is possible when one turns his mind
inward and with full concentration and meditation attains a state of
tranquility. Tranquil-minded people neither hate nor lust. When the human
mind wanders in the grooves of hatred and lust, it becomes blinded by the
pairs of opposites. But one who has attained the summit of equanimity
behaves with evenness. He then performs his duty righteously, impartially,
and in a non-attached way. Such a sage attains everlasting peace and is not
lost in the jungle of confusion. A true devotee of the Lord is in peace always.
Verse 32 states that even the lowly born and people without much
intelligence can attain enlightenment if they devote their lives to the Lord
alone. The words “lowly born” refer to those who do not get much
opportunity to study and learn and who do not have means and amenities by
birth. Those who do not have the opportunity to have a good upbringing can
also attain the highest state.
Those who have already trodden the path in their past lives are born with
certain virtues and samskaras that lead them again on the path of
enlightenment. Then it is easy for them to accomplish or complete that which
they could not in their previous lives. This lesson teaches all aspirants not to
waste their time and energy in worldly pleasures. It is best for them to devote
all their time to God in this mortal world of ours. A life devoted to the Lord is

the best of all lives. That is the purpose of human birth.

34. Let your mind be fixed on Me. My devotee, sacrifice unto Me, bow
unto Me. Intent on Me, thus joining yourself in yoga, you will come only to
Me.
The last verse in this chapter instructs the earnest aspirant to
systematically attain the highest state of perfection. The mind should be
wholly applied and devoted to the real Self alone. The Lord of life seated in
the deepest chamber of our being should be the sole object of meditation.
When the mind is not allowed to roam around but is focused on the Lord
only, it is purified and becomes one-pointed and inward. When a meditative
mind flows uninterruptedly to its object, it attains a state of tranquility, peace,
and happiness.
A consistent method of meditation, contemplation, and prayer along
with devotion to none else but the Lord helps one to attain this state. Such an
aspirant sacrifices all the fruits of his actions to the Lord alone. His mind,
action, and speech are fully dedicated to the Lord. His aim of life is the
attainment of the Lord. Such yogis are liberated. They attain the highest
perfection and become one with the highest.
Here ends the eighth chapter, in which the secret knowledge of the
royal path, called raja vidya, is imparted.

Chapter Ten
The Glorious Manifestations of the Lord

The Blessed Lord said
1. Furthermore, O Mighty-armed One, hear my supreme words, which I
will tell you, with the wish to benefit you, loving one that you are.
2. The groups of gods do not know my origin nor do the great sages. I am
indeed the origin of the gods and of the sages, one and all.
3. He who knows Me as unborn and beginningless, great sovereign of
the worlds, not confused from among human beings, he is freed from all
sins.
The profound teachings imparted by Sri Krishna gradually dispel
Arjuna’s doubts. The heart of the divine teacher is like that of a mother who
always wishes for the well being of her child. Teaching an important truth,
Sri Krishna says that even the gods do not know the mighty Lord, and the
sages also cannot comprehend His majesty. The gods and sages are born from
the highest Lord; the Lord, being father of all, is the father of the gods and
sages. They are his children. The Lord existed with all his glory and majesty
long before the gods and sages. They are not able to understand the highest

Lord in his profundity. One who knows the Truth realizes that the highest
Lord of the universe was never born, that He is without beginning and end,
that He is eternal and infinite. True knowledge is knowing the Lord who is
without beginning and end. He is eternal and perfect. He does everything
selflessly for the spiritual unfoldment of all beings, and it is for that purpose
that He manifests the universe. He is kind and merciful in looking after the
welfare of even the smallest of creatures. Realizing that truth, the aspirant
also leads a selfless life and serves those who are weaker than himself. One
who practices selflessness becomes free from all sin and bondage. He
becomes pure and liberated.

4. The discriminating faculty, knowledge, freedom from confusion,
forgiveness, truth, control, pacification, comfort, discomfort, being, nonbeing, fear as well as reassurance;
5. Non-violence, equanimity, satiety, asceticism, charity, reputation,
disrepute—all of these various kinds of situations of beings happen only
from Me.
6. The seven ancient great sages and the four Manus, My aspects, were
born of My mind, whose progeny are all these worlds and people.
7. He who knows this magnificence (vibhuti) and yoga in its reality here
becomes united with unshakable yoga.
All of the innumerable qualities such as intelligence and knowledge that
exist in human beings arise from the ocean of infinity, the Lord Himself, as
do the seven seers and the four Manus (law givers) who in turn give rise to all
the creatures. The qualities are called bhavas (mental creations) of the Lord;
they are the manifestations of the glory of the Lord, and the power that

creates or manifests is the Lord’s power. From the all-pervading mind of the
Lord arise the mental entities. Intelligence and knowledge are ever-flowing
streams from the ocean of infinity. The majesty of the Lord is displayed in
the manifestation of the virtues mentioned in these verses. The aspirant who
knows and is fully conscious that all manifestations arise from the Lord
attains perfection.
The yogi is he who is in union with the Lord. When the yogi knows that
happiness and misery, success and failure, fame and infamy are the bhavas of
the Lord and that all creatures possessed of these bhavas have arisen out of
the Lord, then in all situations he maintains a tranquil mind. For such a yogi
every aspect of the universe is but an aspect of the mighty Lord Himself. One
who remains in union with the Lord remains fearless.

8. I am the origin of all; everything proceeds from Me. Thinking thus,
the wise, filled with the sentiment of devotion, devote themselves to Me.
9. Their minds absorbed in Me, their pranas entering into Me,
enlightening each other, narrating about Me, they are ever satisfied and
ever delighted.
10. To them who are ever joined in yoga and who devote themselves with
pleasure and love, I confer that yoga of wisdom whereby they come close to
Me.
11. Dwelling in their inner Self, to favor them, out of compassion I
destroy their darkness born of ignorance with the brilliant lamp of
knowledge.
The Lord is the source of all manifestation. In the whole of the universe
there is not a single object that is not dependent on the Lord. The

fundamental cause of all is the highest Lord. Knowing that truth, the aspirant
fixes his mind solely on the Lord and dedicates his life to Him. That
dedication brings knowledge of the Lord to him, and he then imparts that
knowledge to other aspirants. Such a devotee sings the praises of the Lord
and always remains joyful. The aspirant who practices yoga without
interruption secures that knowledge. He always remains in union with the
Lord. The pure knowledge received from that union removes all ignorance
and enables the aspirant to achieve anything and everything that is to be
achieved.
One who has firm faith, full confidence, and devotion to the Lord alone
remains fearless and carries out the sacred mission of the Lord. He has
lifelong dedication to the Lord and gladly courts death while carrying out the
divine mission. He walks on the earth fearlessly and gives the message of
fearlessness to others. To impart that knowledge becomes his prime duty; he
teaches the knowledge of the divine in a simple and lucid manner wherever
he goes. He always sings the song of divine joy, which gives him the highest
of happiness. One whose life is fully dedicated with mind, speech, and action
to the Lord alone remains ever filled with divinity. Such a great one is called
a perennial yogi. In all situations of life, his sadhana is never interrupted. His
love of life is service to the Lord, and with his heart and mind full of love for
God, he always remains in sadhana. Sadhana becomes his life. One who has
attained this buddhi yoga, the yoga of pure reason, always remains in union
with the Lord. He perennially enjoys the love divine. In the mind and heart of
such a yogi remains the presence of the Lord all the time. Because of pure
knowledge, ignorance does not exist at all.

Arjuna said
12. The supreme Brahman, the supreme abode, the supreme purifier are
You, the eternal Spirit (Purusha), the divine first God, unborn and allpervading.
13. So say all the sages and the celestial sages—Narada, Asita, Devala,
and Vyasa—and You Yourself are also telling me so.
14. I believe all that You are telling me to be true, O Keshava. Neither
gods nor demons know Your origin, O Blessed Lord.
15. By yourself alone You know Yourself, O Unexcelled Spirit, O
Nurturer of Beings, Lord of Beings, God of Gods, Master of the World.
16. It behooves You to tell me all Your celestial magnificences (vibhuti)
by which magnificences You dwell pervading all of these worlds.
17. Ever contemplating You, how may I know You, O Yogi; in what
aspects are You to be contemplated by me?
18. Tell me more in detail Your yoga and magnificence, O Krishna.
Hearing this nectar-like speech, I am not satiated.

Having received the knowledge directly, Arjuna realizes that the Lord is
present everywhere. In these verses he praises the profound teachings of Sri
Krishna with eagerness to know more about the Lord of life and of His glory.
The supreme Brahman, the highest and holiest abode, is the final destination
of all aspirants. The sages who have already trodden the path of light and
have attained the purest knowledge have described the Lord as eternal,
birthless, and infinite, the all pervading center of omnipresence. He is the
Purusha found in the deep recesses of the city of life and throughout the
universe. Sages like Narada, Asita, Devala, Vyasa, and many others who
have attained Self-realization describe the Lord in one and the same way;
their descriptions do not differ in any way.
The 14th verse explains that neither those who are godlike nor those
who are demonic have any knowledge of the Lord. The words godlike and
demonic are used respectively for students of good and bad character. In
ancient times all kinds of students possessing various qualities used to study
together in the gurukulas, ashrams, or places of learning where spiritual
knowledge was imparted. Here the student would sit at the feet of his guru in
order to learn the paths of spirituality and receive teachings on divine
knowledge. It is said that Indra, the king of gods, and Virochana, the king of
demons, stayed at the gurukula of Prajapati for many years to master the
science and knowledge of the Self. But neither of the two could grasp that
profound knowledge. The god’s aim was the attainment of Self-realization,
whereas the goal of the demon was the enjoyment of sense pleasures. Indra,
being of a divine nature, stayed in the gurukula for one hundred years to
accomplish his goal of Self-realization, but Virochana, the demonic king,
abandoned his studies and went back to the world to enjoy its pleasures.
The highest Lord is sovereign among all gods; He is the master of the
universe. It is He alone who knows Himself thoroughly. Though He is
omnipresent and omnipotent, His manifestation differs from one place to
another. Ordinary people do not know that the Lord is everywhere, that the
presence of the Lord is in everything, even in the smallest molecule.
Although Arjuna understands that the Lord is all pervading, he is eager to
know the mystery of manifestation in diversity.
Aspirants like Arjuna who desire to meditate on the highest Lord fail to
understand the idea of meditation on the imperceptible omnipresent. They
wonder: If there is nothing concrete to meditate upon, how can one meditate?
The Lord is formless. How is one able to meditate on the formless? How is it

possible for one to meditate on something that has no shape, form, or size?
That is Arjuna’s question in Verse 17. All aspirants have one and the same
question when they are made aware of the formless Lord of all. In the 18th
verse Arjuna, realizing that in meditation he will have to concentrate his mind
on some form, asks a specific question: he wants to know what is the special
and significant manifestation (vibhuti) of the supreme Lord upon which he
can focus his mind during meditation. Sri Krishna answers that question in
the following verses.

The Blessed Lord said
19. Indeed I shall tell you of My celestial magnificences, but only the
main ones, O Best of the Kurus. There is no end to my details.
20. I am the Self, O Master of Sleep, dwelling in the heart of all beings,
and the beginning, the middle, as well as the end of all beings.
21. Of Adityas I am Vishnu; of luminosities I am the sun with rays; of
Maruts I am Marichi; of heavenly bodies I am the moon.
22. Of Vedas I am Sama-Veda; of deities I am Indra; of senses I am the
mind; of beings I am awareness.
23. Of the Rudras I am Shiva; of the Yakshas and Rakshasas I am
Kuvera, the ruling deity of wealth; of the Vasus I am fire; of the highpeaked ones I am Meru.
24. Know Me, O Son of Pritha, the chief of the priests, Brihaspati. Of
commanders I am Skanda; of the lakes I am ocean.
25. Among great sages I am Bhrigu; of speeches I am the one
indestructible syllable OM; of sacrifices I am the sacrifice called japa; of
immovable ones I am the Himalaya.
26. Of all the trees I am the holy fig; of celestial sages I am Narada; of
Gandharvas I am Chitrartha; of adepts I am the sage Kapila.
27. Among horses know Me to be Uchchaihshravas born of the nectar of
immortality; of the chiefs of elephants Airavata; and among human beings
the king.
28. Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; of cows I am the celestial wishfulfilling cow; of progenitors I am passion; of snakes I am Vasuki.
29. Among Nagas I am Ananta; of sea creatures I am Varuna; among

ancestors I am A ryaman; of controlling ones I am Yama, the god of death.
30. Among Daityas I am Prahlada; among calculators I am time; among
beasts I am the lion; among birds I am Garuda.
31. Among blowing ones I am wind; among weapon-bearers I am Rama;
of fish I am the crocodile; among the streams I am the Ganges.
32. I am the beginning, the end, as well as the middle of creation. Of
sciences I am the spiritual science; and of the discussants I am debate.
33. Of letters I am the letter A; of compounds I am the compound of
duality (dvandva); I am the imperishable time, I am the ordainer facing in
all directions.
34. I am the death that plunders all, and I am also the origin of those
who will come in the future. Among feminine forces I am glory, affluence,
speech, memory, intuitive wisdom, steadfastness, and forgiveness.
35. Of hymns I am Brhat-saman; of meters I am Gayatri; of months I am
Margasirsha; of seasons I am the flowery spring.
36. Of deceiving ones I am gambling; of the brilliant I am brilliance; I
am the victory, the initiator of determination, as well as the inner strength
of those endowed with power.
37. Of Vrishnis I am Krishna; of Pandavas I am Arjuna; also among
Munis I am Vyasa; and among those endowed with intuition I am Ushanas.
38. Of controlling ones I am the staff; of those desiring victory I am the
essence of polity; of secrets I am silence; and of the knowing ones I am
knowledge.
39. Whatever is the seed of all beings I am that, O Arjuna. There is no
moving or unmoving entity that may exist without Me.
40. There is no end to My celestial magnificences, O Scorcher of
Enemies; I have told this detail of My magnificences only by way of
illustration.
In these verses the vibhutas, the extraordinary powers and
manifestations of the Lord, are enumerated. The word bhuti means victory,
happiness, and strength, and the word vibhuti means having special power
and great strength. The self-existent Reality is in the sun and in the smallest
particle; it is in all that exists. But the ordinary person perceives the
manifestation of the Lord in only a small number of things. He recognizes the
presence of the supreme Lord only in such things as religious symbols, but in
fact the Lord exists everywhere with one and the same equanimity. The

ordinary person finds it difficult to realize that truth.
In this universe of ours, there are innumerable objects. Therefore the
manifestations of the Lord are endless. The supreme Self is the dweller in the
heart of every being. He is the beginning, the middle, and the end of this
universe. He is the Self of every being. There is not even the smallest unit of
matter or energy over which He does not have governing authority. The
entire universe is His divine expansion. For those who are not able to grasp
this grand idea of the all-pervading nature of the Lord, seventy manifestations
are mentioned in these verses. These verses explain only the prominent
manifestations of the Lord. They are examples of the Lord’s power to
manifest rather than an all-inclusive list. These glorious and majestic
manifestations of the Lord are mentioned in response to Arjuna’s questions as
to what the object of meditation should be. But for contemplators it is not
necessary to choose such objects for the concentration of the mind because
they are already aware of the omnipresent and omnipotent power in all
objects of the universe, from the most minute to the most enormous.
Initially the meditator finds it difficult to control his dissipated mind. To
aid those who are unable to meditate without a concrete object, the teacher
recommends either a symbol, a light, or a sound that helps the student gather
together the dissipated condition of the mind. In our long, unbroken lineage
of meditation, it is recommended that the beginning meditator focus his mind
on the flow of his breath. That makes one aware that all creatures of this
universe are sustained by one and the same vital force, prana, the only one
life giver for all creatures. Concentrating on the flow of the breath has two
definite benefits. First, because mind and breath are closely linked,
concentration on the breath makes the breath become smooth, even, and
calm, and the mind also becomes stilled. Second, the aspirant becomes aware
that there is only one force that sustains the entire universe and all creatures.
The realization that there is one absolute Truth has immense philosophical
value, for when one becomes aware that there is only one life force in all
creatures, he learns to love all as he loves himself.
Sri Krishna gives many alternatives for aspirants who are prepared to
meditate but do not know how to choose the objects of their meditation. He
mentions the sun as one of these. Some manuals recommend gazing at the
sun, but that can be injurious to the optic nerve and can lead one to lose his
eyesight, so aspirants should not use gazing at the sun as the object of
meditation. The scriptures offer a glimpse of how one should practice, but the

meditational methods should be learned only under the guidance of a
competent teacher. No yoga exercise—whether it be hatha yoga, pranayama,
or raja yoga—should ever be practiced on one’s own.
Having received the profound teachings of Sri Krishna, Arjuna is now
eager to know the practical way of meditation. The experience of the ancients
and those great ones who have already trodden the path of meditation guides
students in their advancement. The scriptures say that the aspirant should first
have profound knowledge of the universe and all its forms, and of Brahman
from which this universe arises and by which it is sustained and returns to its
primal source. Without having profound knowledge of the universe, the
human being, the other creatures, and their relationship to one another, it is
not of much use to abruptly begin the practice of meditation. Without
building a profound philosophy, practice or sadhana remains incomplete.
The supreme Self is the Lord of all from whom arise all beings in the
beginning, who sustains them in the middle, and to whom they return in the
end. He is the origin of all. Nothing in the universe is excluded from this
power of powers. Anything that is considered to be a special manifestation
such as the sun, moon, stars, and oceans actually has the same presence of the
Lord that exists in all things—animate and inanimate, large and small. The
sun among objects that shine, the moon among the bodies of the solar system,
the mind among the instruments of knowledge, OM among the sacred
sounds, the king among men, the lion among the animals, Garuda among the
birds, Rama among the brave, and Vyasa among the sages are some of the
special manifestations of the Lord, although His manifestations are endless.
After one becomes aware of the Lord’s manifestations, he finally meditates
on the highest Lord who is the source of light, life, knowledge, and the whole
of the universe.

41. Whatever aspect there may be filled with magnificence, glory, or
energy, know each and every one to be born of a particle of My brilliance.
42. Of what use is it for you to know much more? Only with a particle of
Mine I dwell holding this entire world.

Poets and sages vainly praise the grandeur, beauty, and loftiness of
different aspects of the Lord’s manifestation. But manifestations are only
fragments of the beauty of the whole. There is only one pervading power, and
this universe is just a fraction of its manifestation. Of what use is it to grasp a
partial view? That is only a glimpse of the part and not the knowledge of the
whole. To know partial truth is not to attain the knowledge of the infinite.
“Therefore, Arjuna, attain the knowledge of the whole, the supreme Lord.”
Wherever grandeur, extraordinary beauty, or unusual loftiness exists, it is
solely because of the Lord’s manifestation. Whether that beauty is in human
beings, animals, or any other aspect of manifestation in the universe, it is the
Lord alone that smiles through all these faces.
Thus ends the tenth chapter, in which the teachings of Sri Krishna on
the glorious manifestations of the Lord are explained.

Chapter Eleven
Yogic Vision

Arjuna said
1. Through the words of the supreme secret called spiritual knowledge,
which You have taught out of Your grace and kindness to me, thereby this
delusion of mine has vanished.
2. I have heard from You in detail of the creation and dissolution of
beings as well as Your imperishable greatness, O You having eyes like lotus
petals.
3. As You have spoken of Yourself thus, O Supreme Sovereign, I wish to
see Your lordly form, O Unexcelled Spirit.
4. If you believe that it can be seen by me, O Lord, then show me Your
immutable Self, O Lord of Yoga.
This chapter is more important than the previous chapters, for it explains
both aspects of the Lord: formless and with form. It also describes the goal of
mankind. Arjuna understands that the highest secret of adhyatma (spiritual

knowledge) has been imparted to him as a special grace. He also admits that
the knowledge expounded by Sri Krishna has dispelled delusion from his
mind. He has attained the profound knowledge of the origin of all
manifestation and of the universe, for Sri Krishna has imparted the
knowledge of the greatness of the supreme Brahman to him.
A great master of yoga, Sri Krishna now leads Arjuna further on the
path of Self-awareness. Arjuna still has two desires. One is to have profound
knowledge of the indescribable and ineffable power of Brahman. Brahman is
formless and unmodifiable. It cannot be perceived by the sense organs nor
known by the mind. Arjuna’s other desire is to see the formless Brahman
manifest into forms. He wants to experience both the abstract and concrete
manifestations of Brahman. Arjuna requests Sri Krishna to lead him to direct
experience of the self-existent power of the Lord.

The Blessed Lord said
5. See My multifarious, divine forms of many hues and configurations,
by hundreds and by thousands.
6. See the A dityas, Vasus, Rudras, A shvins, as well as Maruts; see many
wonders that have not been seen before, O Descendant of Bharata.
7. Today see the entire world with everything animate and inanimate,
here dwelling in one, in My body, O Master of Sleep, and whatever else you
wish to see.
8. However, you cannot see Me merely with this eye of your own. I give
you a divine eye. See My lordly yoga.

Sri Krishna says, “O Arjuna, I have innumerable forms of diverse colors
and shapes. There are many miraculous things that you have not seen before.
The whole universe, both animate and inanimate, exists in one part of My
divine body. You are not able to see the whole of My form with your sense
perception. Therefore I will give you a divya chakshu (divine eye) through
which you can see the form of the Lord as a whole.”
According to yogic scriptures the yogi, who with the help of meditation
uses his whole being for seeing, has a divine eye that gives him profound
vision of the entire universe in a single glance. When the mind is led beyond
the concepts and conditionings of time, space, and causation, it can fathom
the unfathomable and attain a state of timelessness and infinity. A teacher
who is a perfect master of yoga has the capacity to expand the consciousness
of his beloved student, to open his divine eye. Sri Krishna performs shakti
pata: he bestows that power and grace on Arjuna, enabling him to see the
magnanimous form of the Lord. When the student has practiced meditation
and when he is exhausted and all his efforts have failed, the yogi gives a
profound touch to such a student, enabling him to open his divine eye. Sri
Krishna, a great teacher and the greatest of yogis, opens Arjuna’s divine eye
so that he can have a vision of the power of the supreme Lord at one glance.
The yogi can open his own divine eye when he is able to bring his
consciousness to the summit of the here and now. Mind is in the habit of
either brooding on the past or imagining the future; it has no experience of
the present. During meditation the mind is focused on the now and thus is
capable of having a vision of past, present, and future simultaneously. That is
called the timeless state of mind. One who has practiced meditation for a long
time understands that it is possible for the meditator to know things
happening in the future long before they occur in the external world. These
experiences are not accidental or prophetic but are the outcome of a onepointed mind, which has the capacity to go beyond the conditionings of time.
Ordinarily human beings can see the diverse forms of the Lord such as
the sun, moon, stars, and other aspects of manifestation with the help of their
eyes. But they do not have the capacity to see the entire universe. Therefore it
is necessary for Sri Krishna to bless Arjuna and open his divine eye. To see
the whole universe, the form of the Lord, one needs divya chakshu. Without a
divine eye, the divine yoga cannot be experienced.

Sanjaya said
9. Having stated thus, O King, Krishna the Sovereign of great yoga
showed to the son of Pritha his supreme, Lordly form—
10. Having many faces and eyes, with many wondrous views, wearing
many divine ornaments, bearing many divine weapons held ready;
11. Wearing divine garlands and vestments, anointed with divine
perfumes, comprising all wonders, the endless God facing in all directions.
12. If there were to rise the brilliance of a thousand suns in heaven, that
would be similar to the brilliance of that great-souled One.
13. Then the Pandava saw there in the body of the God of gods the entire
universe, divided multifariously, dwelling in One.
14. Then possessed by amazement, that Dhananjaya, with his hairs
standing on end, with his hands clasped and bowing with his head,
addressed God.
Let the reader remember that Sanjaya also had divya chaksu, a divine
eye. He was appointed to observe the entire battlefield, and he submitted
first-hand reports to the sage Vyasa. Vyasa recorded all the teachings of the
Bhagavad Gita that were imparted by the yogi Sri Krishna to his beloved

friend and disciple, Arjuna. Dhritarashtra, the blind king, also requested
Sanjaya to explain to him what was taking place on the battlefield. Sanjaya
told Dhritarashtra that Sri Krishna, the great Lord of yoga, has opened
Arjuna’s divine eye and is showing him the form of the highest Lord. That
form has innumerable faces, countless eyes, is endowed with all sorts of
glistening ornaments, holds countless weapons in His innumerable hands,
wears many glistening garlands and garments, and is full of divine fragrance.
It is more lustrous than the light that thousands of suns could radiate.
Arjuna has this profound vision of the whole universe in the body of the
God of gods. Astonished, his hair stands on end; he bows with praying hands
and stands before the Lord. Bowing indicates submission and self-surrender;
praying hands means that one is conscious that the individual soul and the
universal soul should unite. That union is the purpose of human life. Praying
hands is a gesture that the student makes to his revered teacher. It is also the
way of greeting someone in Indian culture and means, “I bow to the divinity
in you.”
Sanjaya is able to see the universal form of the Lord because he has the
same divine eye as Arjuna. There are, in fact, other heroes in the battlefield
who are able to see the divine form of the Lord. They are equally gifted by
the grace of God and the grace of their yoga teachers. Although we often hear
and use the word grace, it has never been satisfactorily explained by
philosophy and psychology. Grace comes to one who deserves it. It does not
come out of desire. When the aspirant has attained a height of spiritual
knowledge and when he has exhausted all human efforts, then dawns the
knowledge to that deserving one who has honestly, sincerely, and truthfully
followed the path of yoga. No doubt it is a gift received by the aspirant, a
reward he receives to enable him to accomplish the task he has assumed.
Many students without making sincere efforts pray to God for His grace. In
their hearts and minds, they are fully aware that they do not deserve grace,
yet they desire it. Desire not, but deserve, and you will have it.

Arjuna said
15. O God, I see in Your body all the gods as well as groups of
differentiated beings, Brahma, the Lord sitting on the lotus seat, all the
seers, as well as celestial serpents.
16. I see You having many arms, bellies, faces, eyes, with unending
forms in all directions. O Sovereign of the universe, bearing universal
forms, I see not Your end nor the middle nor again Your beginning.
17. I see You bearing a crown, a mace, a discus; You are a heap of light
effulgent in all directions, very difficult to look at, immeasurable, and all
around brilliant like a blazing fire and the sun.

18. You are the indestructible syllable, the supreme object of knowledge;
You are the transcendental repository of this universe; You are the
immutable One, the guardian of eternal law (dharma). I believe You to be
the eternal Spirit.
19. I see You without beginning, middle, or end; of unending virility,
with endless arms, with the moon and the sun for Your eyes; Your face like
a blazing fire that receives oblation offerings, scorching this universe with
your effulgence.
20. This interval between heaven and earth is indeed pervaded by you
alone, and so are all the points of the compass. Seeing this fearsome,
wondrous form, all the three worlds are disquieted, O Great-souled One.
21. Those groups of gods are entering You, some of them affeared,
singing praises to You with hands clasped. The groups of great sages and
adepts saying “may it fare well” praise you with ample hymns.
22. Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Vishve-devas, Ashvins, Maruts,
Ushmapas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Sid-dhas, in many groups,
look at you and are all amazed.
23. Your great form with many faces and eyes, O Mighty-armed One,
with many arms, thighs, and feet, with many bellies, terrible with many
jaws—seeing it, all the worlds are troubled with fear, and so am I.
24. Touching the sky, blazing with many hues, with mouth wide open,
with huge, burning eyes—seeing You, with my inner self trembling in fear,
I do not find consolation or peace, O Vishnu.
25. Seeing Your mouths terrible with jaws that appear like the fire of
time, I lose the sense of direction and find no solace. Be pleased, O Lord of
gods, the dwelling place of the universe.
26. Those sons of Dhritarashtra together with all the groups of kings,
Bhishma, Drona, and Suta’s son Karna together with our own chief
warriors—
27. They hasten and enter Your mouths, which are fearsome and awful
with jaws; some, stuck in the interstices of Your teeth, are seen with their
heads crushed to powder.
28. As the many flows of the waters of rivers run only toward the ocean,
so the brave warriors of the human world burning on all sides are entering
Your mouths.
29. As moths with increasing speed enter the blazing fire for their
destruction, similarly the worlds with increased speed also enter Your

mouths toward their destruction.
30. With flaming tongues You are swallowing from all sides all the
worlds with burning mouths. Filling the entire world with effulgences,
Your terrible lights are scorching it, O Vishnu.
31. Do tell me who are You of fearsome form? Salutations to You, O Best
of gods. Do be pleased. I wish to know You, the first One; I do not know
Your movement at all.
Arjuna, having seen the cosmic form of the divine Lord, is astonished
and terrified. That vision overwhelms him, and he says, “O Lord, I see in
Your cosmic body all the divine powers, the king of Gods, Brahma, seated on
the lotus, sages, and serpents.” He sees that the Lord of lords is not only
merciful but also the cruel fire of annihilation. To accept life and the universe
with all its diversities is wisdom.
That which is pleasant is not necessarily good, and that which is good is
not necessarily pleasant. Pain and pleasure are inseparably mingled. They
have separate realities only on the gross level of consciousness. That which is
visualized by the ordinary man is limited because of his limited sense
perception. When consciousness travels upward toward the higher realms of
life, the vision is completely different. That which is pleasant or painful on
the gross level of consciousness is not then pleasant or painful but is
something different and extraordinary in its nature.
When the mind becomes inward, it encounters the reality of inner
dimensions of life, and one is astonished to see how the sense perceptions are
distorted on the gross level of consciousness. Here one can examine, analyze,
and understand the limitations of sense perception. When the whole mind
becomes an eye, it captures the vision of the subtle realms within, with all
their profundities. It is able to grasp unfathomable levels by itself, without the
help of the sense organs. It is able to analyze and judge as a witness, as a seer
of the unknown and unfathomable levels of life.
When the mind floats in the divine consciousness of infinite knowledge,
it is able to see the causes of all the gross manifestations seen by the sense
organs. That diversity which is seen on the gross level of consciousness does
not exist in the inner world because in the causal world everything remains
inseparably mingled. That which is lawful and unlawful, good and bad,
pleasant and unpleasant in the external world is not experienced in the same
way. That which is seen as a tree, a mountain, or an ocean in the external

world is seen in the causal realm as a seed in its subtle potential form. In that
realm apprehension and comprehension are totally different.
The sage sees things as they are in their totality, in an unbroken
undivided form, whereas the ordinary mind is unable to have the vision of the
whole for lack of a divine eye. Prolonged association with the objects of the
world creates attachment for the human mind and obscures the vision of the
whole. But when the divine eye is opened, one’s previous values regarding
the objects of the world change, and a new level of life is fathomed. Then the
reality is experienced in an entirely different light.
The aspirant who has not raised the primal force, kundalini, experiences
the lowest and grossest level of life, the projections of his lower mind, and
sees only evil, devils, and demons because he is under the influence of his
lower nature. But when the primal force is awakened and when this
ascending force of consciousness fathoms higher and more subtle levels of
life, the aspirant has the vision of the finer forces of life related to the
aesthetic sense of mind. He then sees all things as beautiful. If one sees
something from one angle it looks ugly, but if he sees the same thing from a
different angle it looks exceedingly beautiful. It depends upon one’s vantage
point. When one attains a higher level of consciousness with the force of the
ascending divinity within, he sees things entirely differently: he experiences
joy, happiness, and peace. One experiences no confusion or conflict, for there
one neither sees divisions, nor does he see things in a partial way. Then he is
aware of one unbroken entity.
If we view all these things—the gross, subtle, and subtlest levels—at
one glance and put them together and see them as a whole rather than
separately, that vision will be overwhelming. When one goes to the innermost
level of consciousness from which spring all the diverse forms of the
universe, he comes to know that the manifestation of diversity has only one
source, which we call unity. Unity in diversity is the law of life. When one is
able to visualize both, he becomes astonished at the difference between the
apparent reality and the underlying Reality.
With his divine eye, Arjuna is able to have the profound vision of the
whole universe being born and dying, going to the depths of the unmanifested
One, and then all forms arising anew. That vision makes him realize that his
grief and despondency are self-created because of his attachment to objects
and relationships of the mundane world. With the grace of God, a sage, or a
competent teacher, the yogi is able to have divine vision. When the ascending

force of human endeavor has attained its height, then dawns Shakti, the grace
of the higher Self. Those who are fortunate to have that grace receive
knowledge through vision and not through the mind.
The question arises: Why didn’t Sri Krishna give Arjuna the divine eye
in the very beginning? The answer is that Arjuna was not then prepared to
have that vision. His mind was confused and plunged into sorrow. In the
modern world, too, the aspirant goes to his teacher confused, and the teacher
prepares him for experiencing the higher levels of consciousness. But until
the student is fully prepared, the teacher does not impart the subtle
knowledge and techniques. After Arjuna has accepted Sri Krishna as Lord
incarnate and received the knowledge of life and the universe, he becomes
eager to have a vision of the whole of the universe. After examining the
objects of the world in a divided way, Arjuna now wants to see the whole
form of the Lord, which contains all the innumerable forms of the universe.
Yet that vision terrifies and astonishes Arjuna. When the student awakens the
kundalini, he has similar experiences and sometimes becomes so terrified that
he wants to abandon his practices. During that period the competent teacher
helps him to continue his practices and to attain the highest level of
consciousness.

The Blessed Lord said

32. I am time waxing, destroyer of the worlds, moving here to gather
back the worlds. Even with you all these will cease to be, the warriors who
are standing in each of the armies.
33. Therefore rise and gain reputation; conquering the enemy, enjoy the
prosperous kingdom. They are already killed by you; you become merely an
instrument, O Expert at Shooting with the Left Hand.
34. Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna as well as all the brave warriors
—they are already killed by Me. Destroy them; do not suffer hesitation.
Fight! You are going to be a winner of enemies in the battle.
Arjuna is convinced yet bewildered by the vision, and he wants Sri
Krishna to remove his confusion concerning the destructive aspect of the
Lord. Sri Krishna says to Arjuna that the highest Lord has the capacity to
annihilate and assimilate all the manifestations and beings in the same way
that he has the capacity to create them. His power of annihilation should not
be misunderstood as cruelty, for the Lord is compassionate and loves His
children in exactly the same way that a loving mother loves her children. But
if there is an abscess anywhere in the body, the mother takes her child to the
surgeon to have it removed. It is a painful experience for the child, and he
cries in the pain and agony that is experienced, but the mother knows that if
the abscess is not removed it will infect the whole body. Similarly, Arjuna is
aware of the fact that the army standing before him is unjust and unrighteous
and that if it is not destroyed the unjust and unrighteous rulers will rule in
unlawful ways and thus destroy the whole nation. Sri Krishna says to Arjuna,
“Consider them already dead. Have you not seen them being annihilated by
My force of destruction? Have you not seen them being swallowed by kala
(time)? All things in this mortal world are subject to time; everything is
annihilated by time. Therefore, Arjuna, you are only an instrument. Fight the
battle, for it is the battle of the upward march to final liberation. You should
accomplish the mission of your life by establishing the kingdom of dharma.
You are only an instrument.”

Sanjaya said
35. Hearing these words of Keshava, his hands clasped, trembling,
wearing a crown, bowing again and again, Arjuna addressed Krishna with
a trembling voice, exceedingly afraid, prostrating.

Arjuna said
36. Aptly, O Lord of Senses, by glorifying You the world rejoices and is
attracted with love toward You; the demonic ones are running in all
directions, afraid; the multitudes of adepts are all bowing to you.
37. Wherefore should they not bow to You, O Great-souled One, the
greatest, the creator even of Brahma in the beginning, endless, Lord of the
gods, the dwelling place of the world, You the indestructible syllable,
existent, nonexistent, and whatever is beyond these.
38. You are the first god, the ancient Spirit; You are the transcendental
repository of this universe; You are the knower, the object of knowledge,
and the transcendent abode. O, You of endless forms, this universe is
spanned and permeated by You.
39. You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the moon, the progenitor, and
great grandfather! Salutations, salutations be to You a thousand times, and
again and even more again salutations, salutations to You.
40. Salutations in front of You and behind You; salutations be to You
from all sides, O All. You of endless power and immeasurable stride fill and
pervade everything totally. Therefore You are All.

41. Thinking You my friend, whatever I said impetuously—O Krishna! O
Yadava! O friend!—not knowing this glory of Yours, inadvertently as well
as out of affection,
42. As I have been disrespectful out of jest in occasions of sport, sleep, or
dining, alone or in the presence of others, O Infallible One, I beg You, who
are immeasurable, to forgive me.
43. You are the father of the moving and unmoving world; You are the
honorable, greatest guru. There is no one equal to You. How can anyone
excel even in the three worlds, O You of unequalled power?
44. Therefore, bowing, with lowered body I seek your indulgence, You,
who are the sovereign object of praises; like father to son, like friend to
friend, like a dear one to the beloved. O God, You must forgive me.
45. Happy at seeing what was never seen before, yet my mind is
trembling with fear. Show me, God, the same previous form; be pleased, O
Sovereign of gods, dwelling place of the worlds.
46. I want to see You the same way as before, wearing crown, bearing
mace, with discus in hand. Be of the same four-armed form, O Thousandarmed One whose form is the universe.
Listening to Sri Krishna tell him that his enemies are already dead and
that he should simply become an instrument to secure victory, the thought
arises in Arjuna’s mind that the Lord has done so much for him. He realizes
that he is not accepting the victory that is so kindly being granted to him.
Trembling with fear and humility, he salutes the Lord and praises Him.
“Trembling with fear” here means that when one encounters his own
weaknesses and inadequacies he first tries to deny them. But when he faces
them he becomes overwhelmed with emotion. He realizes his inadequacies,
becomes humble, and wants to remove them. Sanjaya narrates this whole
situation to the blind King Dhritarashtra.
The true yogi and aspirant always finds delight in exclaiming the
qualities and powers of the Lord. He is devoted and thinks of the Lord all the
time. He does not know how to think otherwise. He remains overwhelmingly
inspired by his experiences and thoughts of the divine. The wicked, however,
do not make efforts to understand and know the glory of the Lord. They do
not like to hear about the Lord, for in their egoism they consider themselves
lords unto themselves. They keep themselves away from satsanga (company
of the sages). But the day comes when even the wicked become disappointed

with the fleeting enjoyments of the world. Then they realize the existence of
God and pray to Him for His forgiveness.
Only the humble and awakened enjoy listening to the talks of the great
sages. Those who are awakened know that the Lord is the first cause of the
whole universe, the fountainhead of all knowledge, the One who is the final
abode of all. He manifests this universe and pervades it. His is the only power
that appears in many ways such as agni (fire) and vayu (the vital breath). The
fire of life and the vital breath are thus the Lord’s own aspects. He is infinite,
having infinite forms. It is the Lord alone who protects; He is the teacher of
teachers, and His glory cannot be equaled.
Those who are aware of the greatness of God remain in delight and sing
the praises of the Lord. There are only a fortunate few who are in love with
the Lord. The wicked remain away. The Lord of life and the universe is the
first cause, complete in Itself. Therefore He is worthy of salutations. The
sages follow the path of divinity, for there is only one truth without a second.
When one realizes that unity in diversity and knows that there is only
one truth and that all forms are but the forms of only One, then service to all
becomes service to oneself. Hating others is hating oneself; loving all is
loving oneself. On this code is founded the dharma of mankind. The duty of
mankind is to love all and exclude none.
Many enjoy singing the song of the Lord when they see the excellence
of the Lord in the universe. Whether they know the Lord or not and whether
they are conscious of it or not, admiring the beauty of any aspect of the Lord
is in fact admiring the highest Lord. Both the wicked and the sage are
manifestations of the Lord. Anything that exists in the universe is His
manifestation. Whenever a person is attracted to anything, he is in fact drawn
to the glory possessed by the Lord. The sages and yogis experience and
realize that truth, whereas others spontaneously appreciate God’s creation but
are not aware of the omnipresence of the Lord. The ignorant person acts
under the influence of his ignorance. If he first acquires right knowledge and
then learns to admire God’s creation, he will be liberated. The mind of an
ignorant person is delighted by the charms and temptations of the world and
in fact the delight, too, is part of the Lord’s nature. Whatever man describes,
acts, and feels is actually the description of the Lord only. The Lord is the
first cause of all. He is complete in Himself. The wicked are afraid of Him,
but the accomplished yogi delightfully salutes Him.
All the things existing and nonexistant, animate and inanimate, and

beyond these are but the Lord’s own form. Whatever is beyond sat (that
which exists) and asat (that which does not exist) is also the Lord’s form. His
external gross form is called asat, for it goes through change and destruction,
but His subtlest form is not subject to change. The Lord is most ancient, ever
existent, and the refuge of the whole universe. He is the object, the
knowledge, and the knower. In any direction one moves, he cannot go
anywhere but to the Lord, who has countless forms: Vayu (the vital breath),
Yama (the Lord of Death), Agni (fire), Varuna (the Lord of Water), Chandra
(the moon), Prajapati, Vishnu, Shankara and so on. All there is is the Lord
Himself. All these aspects of the divinity have different functions, but they
function because of the power of the Lord. As one human being plays many
roles and is called by various names according to the actions and roles he
performs, so is the case with the Lord, whose aspects of manifestation differ
in quality, action, and form yet have arisen from one absolute truth: Brahman.
Arjuna formerly related to Sri Krishna merely as a friend, for he did not
know his greatness. Now that Arjuna has seen the cosmic form of the Lord,
he asks to be pardoned for having treated Sri Krishna lightly. He prays to Sri
Krishna to forgive him for any disrespect. Most people jokingly lie or say
things that are not true because they are not aware of the truth. They do not
know that the Lord is both within and without and that all the strength for
whatever one does is received from one and the same source: the Lord.
Arjuna, whose heart is purified by Sri Krishna, realizes that, but those whose
hearts are not pure do not realize the truth. The Lord is the father of all that
moves and moves not. He is the highest of all preceptors. There is none
equivalent to Him. In all three realms of consciousness—gross, subtle, and
subtlest—there is only One present all the time, and that is the Lord.
One who devotes his life to the Lord alone is forgiven by the Lord as
good parents forgive their child. The Lord is very kind and forgives all those
who pray to Him. The aspirant should pray to the Lord for forgiveness of his
blunders. Prayer strengthens constant awareness. Without constant awareness
one slips from the path and wastes his time and energy doing things that are
harmful to himself and others. Prayer gives strength, and repentance prevents
the aspirant from doing that which is harmful.
Astonished by what he has been shown and still fearful, Arjuna says, “O
Lord, be pleased and show me Thy gentle form.” Arjuna prays to Sri Krishna,
who shows him chaturbhuja (his four-armed form). Having heard this request
Sri Krishna, with full affection for his dear devotee, looks at Arjuna and

responds.

The Blessed Lord said
47. Pleased with you, O Arjuna, I have shown you through the yoga of
Self, this transcendent form of Mine—consisting of light, being universal,
being endless, being the first one—which was never seen by anyone other
than you before.
48. Neither through the Vedas, sacrifices, or studies, nor by charities,
nor by actions, nor by fierce ascetic observances, can I be seen in this form
in the human world by anyone other than you, O the Bravest among Kurus.
49. Be not afeared, nor be confused seeing this, such a fearsome form of
Mine. Dismissing your fear, with a happy mind, see again this same

previous form of Mine.

Sanjaya said
50. The indwelling One having addressed Arjuna thus, showed him
again his own previous form and consoled him, as he was afraid, the greatsouled One again assuming a pleasant-looking body.
These verses indicate that the universal form of the Lord can indeed be
visualized. The aspirant can attain this profound vision of the form of the
Lord by practicing atma yoga, by making full efforts, utilizing all human
resources, and by the grace of the Lord. Anyone who dedicates himself to the
Lord can have such a vision. True dedication requires that one attain nonattachment and tranquility, surrender the fruits of his action to the Lord only,
and remember the Lord in every breath of his life. The Lord of life has a
threefold mission: protection of the good, annihilation of evil, and
establishment of the good conduct of life. Arjuna, having seen the cosmic
vision of the Lord, dedicates himself to the Lord’s mission.
Any aspirant who dedicates himself to the Lord will be able to see the
universal form of the Lord as Arjuna did. But if the aspirant thinks that he
can attain that profound vision through scriptural knowledge, by giving gifts,
by doing good actions, or by performing rituals he is wrong, for that is not
possible. There are two conditions that enable one to have such a vision of
the Lord. First one should know atma yoga, and second he must receive the
grace of the mighty Lord.
Sri Krishna says that the universal form of the Lord was never seen by
anyone before. That means that only a fortunate few can have such a vision;
it does not mean that no aspirant can ever have that vision. It should be
remembered here that Sanjaya is also gifted with a divine eye, and he is
equally astonished to see the vision of the cosmic Lord. Sri Krishna says, “O
Arjuna, do not be frightened or dismayed by the cosmic form that you have
seen. Maintain your balance and keep your mind tranquil, and now be aware
of My human form once again.”
The aspirant who practices kundalini yoga under the competent
guidance of a yogi also attains profound visions while traversing from one
level of consciousness to another. But only dedicated yogis who practice
atma yoga and who deserve the grace of the Lord are able to see the vision
described here in all its glory.

Arjuna said
51. Seeing this pleasant, human form of Yours, O Krishna, I have
recovered my senses and returned to my natural feelings.
Arjuna says, “Lord, having seen Thy human form, I have recovered my
normal consciousness and have come back to my usual nature.” This verse
indicates that Arjuna’s consciousness during the period in which he had the
cosmic vision of the Lord was quite different from the experience one usually
has during the waking state. Surely he was not dreaming either. It is a state of
expanded consciousness and not of unconsciousness, for in a state of
unconsciousness one does not remember what he sees or visualizes. It is a
consciousness similar to that of samadhi, in which the mind remains tranquil
yet the aspirant remains fully conscious. In fact it is a state between the
sleeping state and samadhi. During yoga nidra (yogic sleep) the student
learns to expand his consciousness yet remains in deep sleep. This can be
called sleepless sleep. That which cannot be known during the waking,
dreaming, and sleeping states can be known during yogic sleep. Opening the
divine eye is similar to yogic sleep but not exactly the same. It is possible
only when a perfect yogi does shakti pata, bestows grace to that student who
has been faithfully practicing yoga and who has already attained a deep state
of concentration and meditation yet still finds himself incapable of attaining
the highest state of samadhi. One cannot attain samadhi by the application of
human efforts alone: grace helps him to remove the last stumbling block.
Seeing a vision or opening the divine eye is a case of shakti pata in
which the yogi opens the aspirant’s third eye with his touch or gaze. But this
is done only in rare cases and not in the way modern teachers claim to do it
with anyone and everyone. Sri Krishna says that by practicing atma yoga and
with the grace of God, the aspirant can also have a similar vision.

The Blessed Lord said
52. This form of Mine, very difficult to see, that you have seen—even
gods are ever desirous of seeing this form.
53. Not through the Vedas, nor by ascetic observances, nor by charity,
nor through sacrifices can I be seen in this nature as you have seen Me.
54. O Arjuna, only through devotion directed toward none other can I be
seen, and known in reality, and be entered, O Scorcher of Enemies.
55. Performing My act, holding Me as supreme, My devotee, devoid of
attachments, whoever is free of animosity toward all beings, he comes to
Me.

Sri Krishna says that the profound vision of the cosmic Lord that was
seen by Arjuna is extremely difficult to attain. Those who tread the path of
divinity aspire to have the same vision, but that vision cannot be received by
studying the Vedas, by practicing austerities or self-mortification, by giving
gifts, or by performing sacrificial rites. It can be experienced only when one
has one-pointed devotion, ananya bhava, which means “I am not different.”
Only when the aspirant completely gives up all attachment to the people and
objects of the world, dedicates his whole life to the service of mankind, and
performs all his actions for the Lord alone can he visualize the universal form

of the Lord and realize the pure Self. When the aspirant constantly practices
the method of ananya bhava, he establishes a oneness with his real Self: he
does not think of himself as different from the real Self. It is only possible to
attain that state when one stops identifying with the objects of the world and
establishes himself in his true nature.
Here ends the eleventh chapter, in which profound knowledge and
vision of the cosmic Lord is imparted.

Chapter Twelve
The Yoga of Devotion

Arjuna said
1. Those devotees ever joined in yoga who worship You thus and those
who worship the unmanifest indestructible syllable—among them which
are the highest masters of yoga?
Arjuna’s vision of the Lord is only momentary, for he has to come down
to the world of ordinary reality to perform his duty. But something unique
occurs in Arjuna’s life at that moment, and he develops great faith in the
teachings of Sri Krishna. All miracles and visions experienced by the aspirant
are actually the signs and symptoms that are experienced on the path, but
they are not signs of attainment or fulfillment. The attainment is Selfrealization.
The first verse of the 12th chapter puts forth a question that is raised in
Arjuna’s mind after he sees the vision of the Lord. Overwhelmed by that
vision, Arjuna wants to know whether he should meditate on the form of the
Lord or on the formless. The absolute truth is beyond the senses, mind, and
intellect, and unless one attains that, final liberation is not possible. But if the
final realization is attained, there is still another question to be answered:
How should one conduct himself in the world? How should he function?
After all, he still lives in the world of apparent reality. Sri Krishna is teaching
Arjuna how to live in the external world.

The Blessed Lord said
2. Those who, ever joined in yoga, entering their mind into Me, worship
Me, endowed with highestfaith, I believe them to be the most united in
yoga.
Most people cannot fathom the idea of meditation on the Absolute,
which is formless and attributeless. Only a fortunate few are able to attain
that highest state of realization. The path of bhakti (devotion) is considered to
be superior for those who are unable to realize the pure Self. It is difficult to
conceive of meditating without a form or object on which to focus the mind.
Sri Krishna, therefore, advises Arjuna to have a concrete form for the
concentration of mind, and he teaches Arjuna to worship the manifest form of
the Lord with firm faith. The aspirant cannot concentrate his mind if he has
no faith in his heart and if he mechanically practices the technique of
concentration. Whether one follows the path of bhakti or the path of jnana
(Self-realization), a one-pointed mind is important, and that cannot be
achieved without concentration. Concentration of mind and faith are
essentials for treading either path. The ordinary sadhaka or aspirant should
have a concrete form for concentration and meditation before his mind is
prepared for the higher realms.
Sri Krishna says that those who are devoted solely to Him, who worship
Him alone, are superior devotees. Such devotees have three positive qualities:
full dedication of mind, complete dedication of their whole lives, and worship
with full faith. It is only then that the fruit of devotion is secured. Then alone
can one be considered to be a great devotee. Sri Krishna advises Arjuna to
concentrate on an object that has qualities that will lead him toward reverence
and devotion. If an object is chosen for concentration but the meditator does
not appreciate its qualities, the mind cannot concentrate on that object. The
object chosen for meditation should have qualities that enable the meditator
to respond to it. Any manifest form of the Lord possessed of excellence that
suits the aspirant can be used as the object of concentration. Any aspect of

manifestation that can be concentrated upon with firm faith is helpful to the
devotee. One who fully devotes his life to worshiping and concentrating on
any aspect of manifestation with unshaken faith can attain perfection.

3. Those, however, who worship the indestructible syllable, the
unmanifest that cannot be specified, the all-pervading, beyond thought,
absolute, immovable, permanent One—
4. Who control the group of senses well, hold all to be alike everywhere,
delight in benefiting all beings, they find only Me.
5. They have greater difficulty whose minds are drawn to the
unmanifest; the unmanifest way is found with difficulty by those who are
dwelling in bodies.
Those who contemplate on the non-manifest Self beyond all forms think
that saguna worship (the worship of form) is inferior to nirguna
contemplation. Nirguna contemplation is focused on the absolute truth, which
has no form, no name, and therefore no attributes. Although one cannot
worship the formless, it can be a subject of contemplation. Those who find
delight in the contemplation of the formless, nameless, and attributeless
Brahman think that the worship of God with form and name, with attributes,
is inferior. The path of nirguna is difficult, and there are chances for the
aspirant to slip. Ordinarily the mind needs a concrete object upon which to
focus and rest, for the mind is in the habit of depending on concrete objects.
It requires great preparation for the finest faculty of mind, buddhi, to be able
to understand the difference between the Self and the non-self, the real and
unreal. But when buddhi is sharpened, one has the capacity to go beyond the
realm of forms. Only a fortunate few tread the path of pure reason.

6. However, they who renounce all actions unto Me, are intent upon Me,
they worship Me, meditating with yoga directed to no other.
7. Their minds absorbed in Me, I soon become their deliverer from the
ocean of death and worldly cycle, O Son of Pritha.
8. Settle your mind only in Me, enter your intellect into Me. Henceforth
you will live only in Me. There is no doubt.
Sri Krishna integrates the paths of devotion and knowledge. Seeing
Arjuna’s conflict in regard to saguna and nirguna practices, Sri Krishna
states: (1) The Lord is the one single and highest goal of life; (2) Contemplate
and meditate only upon the one truth without a second; (3) Concentration of
the mind should not be on any object other than the Lord; (4) The entire
sadhana of the aspirant is to be directed to the Lord alone; (5) All the
faculties of mind, including buddhi, should be directed toward the Lord
alone; (6) Dedicate all your actions and the fruits therein to the Lord alone;
(7) Be a yogi; identify yourself with your essential nature instead of with the
world. When the aspirant realizes his essential nature and performs his duties
skillfully and with non-attachment, he remains victorious and free, liberated.
He is free from the snare of death, from the mire of delusion, from the rounds
of births and deaths.
The concepts of identification and identity are central to modern
psychology. At first the child identifies with his parents. Later he identifies
with other aspects of the apparent reality, so much so that he thinks of
himself only as the apparent reality. He forms an identity or sense of who he
is as a distinct individual, but that identity is actually based on complete
confusion, for he has come to think of himself solely in terms of the world of
forms and names. He takes certain qualities onto himself and attributes others
to the world outside of him. According to yogic science such identifications
are completely erroneous and mislead one so that he creates apparent
separation, distress, and conflict for himself and others.

Sri Krishna exhorts the sadhaka to give up such false identification and
instead of being absorbed in the world to allow himself to become completely
absorbed in and identified with the supreme Lord. He tells Arjuna to enter
into Him, to become one with Him so that there is no distinction. Then the
sadhaka becomes an embodiment of the Lord. All of his actions are no longer
his alone but are the actions of the Lord.
Many aspirants misapply this teaching. They think that they can become
devoted to their teacher in the same way. And many teachers develop inflated
egos and encourage their students to worship them and identify with them.
Such identification merely produces carbon copies of the teacher: the
aspirants walk like the teacher, dress like the teacher, and talk like the
teacher. There are many such foolish students who have merely surrendered
to the ego of another and have become dependent. Rather than giving up their
illusions, they are ever more identified with and hypnotized by the illusory
world of names and forms. Sri Krishna is not like other teachers. He asks the
student to become free from the forms and names of the world and to identify
instead with that which lies beyond, which is his true essential nature.

9. Now, if you cannot harmonize a stilled mind in Me, then desire to find
Me through the yoga of practice, O Arjuna.
10. If you are not even capable of practicing, then become intent on My
acts. Even performing actions for My sake, you will gain fulfillment.
11. Now, if you are unable to do even this, then resorting to My yoga, do
renounce the fruits of all actions, with your mind and self under control.
It should be understood that Arjuna is not only speaking for himself but
represents all seekers and that Sri Krishna answers Arjuna’s questions for all
aspirants. Sri Krishna says to Arjuna, “If you cannot concentrate your mind
on the form or on the formless Brahman, if you are not able to practice the

worship of saguna or the path of nirguna, if you are not able to concentrate on
Me, you can practice abhyasa, the path of performing actions for the Lord
only. Even for the aspirant who cannot concentrate, meditate, or contemplate,
there is a way to attain spirituality. Abhyasa means practicing, repeating the
same method again and again until the goal is attained. In the path of
spirituality the student may find himself incapable of attending to his sadhana
regularly and punctually. For lack of discipline and orderliness, the aspirant
may slip back to his old habit patterns. In such cases he should not abandon
the path of spirituality but should again make sincere efforts and practice his
sadhana and make it a regular routine.
Abhyasa should be done in an unbroken way; steady practice is needed.
If the aspirant thinks that practicing sadhana for some time and then
abandoning it for awhile will help him, he is wrong. One must make sincere
and constant effort, regularly and punctually, toward the goal. If for some
reason, such as ill health, an accident, or any other obstacle that arises, one
cannot do his meditation, he should learn to dedicate the prime actions he
performs—eating, drinking, sleeping, and so on—so that he can maintain
constant awareness of the supreme Lord. He should say to himself, “I will do
all actions for Brahman and dedicate all the fruits of my actions to Brahman.”
With that determination the mind starts flowing in only one direction. This
form of practice is equally beneficial.
Many beginning students are stirred emotionally and overdo meditation.
Then after a few days or months, they abandon their practices. It is not
helpful to do that. One should be aware of his own capacity and improve
himself gradually and steadily instead of being emotional, overdoing things,
and sometimes going beyond his capacity. The motivation for doing sadhana
should be strengthened gradually. A moderate way of life in eating, sleeping,
and performing other duties should be developed.
In the beginning the student should learn to dedicate his prime actions,
and gradually to dedicate all his actions. That brings about unbroken
consciousness and awareness of Brahman. If the student is unable to dedicate
all his actions, there is yet another way for him to become free from the
bondage created by his actions: he should learn to dedicate or give up the
fruits of his actions. If one lacks self-control, concentration of mind, and zeal
to dedicate all his actions, then giving up the fruits of his actions is a way
toward perfection. When the aspirant practices surrendering the fruits of his
actions, in due course this way of being becomes part of his life. It is a

profound and concrete worship.
Dedicating the fruits of one’s actions is the easiest way for most people.
But those who cannot even do that should learn to practice self-control
according to their capacities and abilities and should cultivate the desire to
have union with the Lord and to surrender whatever they can. Whatever act,
great or small, that one can perform, surrendering its fruits will be helpful for
his growth. If the aspirant follows a particular code of conduct according to
which the fruits of his actions are not to be kept for his enjoyment, and if he
gradually practices dedicating those fruits, slowly his desire for enjoyment
will be reduced. Finally it will be reduced to the point of zero, and such
desirelessness is a state of perfection.

12. Knowledge is better than practice; meditation is distinguished as
greater than knowledge. Higher than meditation is renouncing the fruits of
actions. Immediately after renunciation comes peace.
Continuing his comparison of various paths, Sri Krishna says that
superior to sadhana is the path of knowledge, and higher than knowledge is
the path of dhyana (meditation). The path of knowledge was discussed in the
second chapter, and the method of dhyana was briefly described in the sixth
chapter. In the eighth verse of this chapter the method Sri Krishna imparts is
to focus the mind, intellect, and heart on the highest Self alone. But the
aspirants who are not able to practice these paths should dedicate the fruits of
their actions to the Lord. If the fruits of one’s actions are not dedicated, no
path of sadhana is helpful. Only by dedicating the fruits of his actions does
one attain peace.

13. Bearing no animosity toward any being, amiable as well as
compassionate, free of ‘I’, free of ‘mine’, holding pain and pleasure as
equal, forgiving,
14. Always satisfied, with a controlled nature, of firm resolve, a yogi who
has surrendered his mind and intelligence unto Me, who is My devotee, he
is My beloved.
15. He from whom the world does not become excited, and he who does
not become excited from the world, liberated from the agitations or
exhilaration, intolerance, and fear, he is My beloved.
16. Free of expectation, pure, dextrous, neutral, free of insecurities, he
who renounces expectations of fruits from all acts that he initiates, who is
My devotee, he is My beloved.
17. He who neither rejoices nor hates, neither grieves nor desires, he

who renounces all that is attractive or unattractive, whosoever is endowed
with devotion, he is My beloved.
18. A like toward foe or friend, similarly toward honor or dishonor, alike
toward cold and heat as well as pain and pleasure, devoid of attachment,
19. Equal to praise and censure, maintaining silence, satisfied with
whatever; homeless, with stable intelligence, whosoever is endowed with
devotion, that man is My beloved.
20. Those who follow this virtuous nectar of immortality that I have
taught, maintaining faith, holding Me supreme, those devotees are My
deeply beloved.
These verses explain the characteristics of the best of devotees. Such a
one hates none and loves all, is kind to all and treats everyone alike. For him
there is no attachment to any particular person. He has no pride, regards
misery and pleasure alike, forgives all, and practices spiritual sadhana
regularly. Through his spiritual discipline he is able to control his senses. It is
important to control the senses, for they distract and dissipate the mind.
Without control over the mind and senses, sadhana is not possible. One who
is not motivated by desire for sense enjoyment, who performs his duty with
full determination, and who dedicates his skills to the Lord’s work is dear to
the Lord. He who does not despise anyone and whom no one despises is not
affected by success or failure, anger or fear. He who is single-mindedly
devoted to his duty and remains equally non-attached to gain and loss is dear
to the Lord. One who is able to attain the state of tranquility, not caring for
honor or dishonor, who is free from the pairs of opposites, who maintains
silence, does not have any home for himself, whose mind is always onepointed, and whose heart is full of faith regards the Lord as his own Self.
Such a one who has secured the highest of knowledge is a blessed one.
To be perfect is to remove all the imperfections in mind, action, and
speech. Verses 13 through 20 describe the following virtues, which an
aspirant should acquire on the path of perfection: (1) Hatred is the root cause
of all misery, for by hating others one isolates himself from the whole;
therefore learn to love and give. (2) One should be a friend to all; he should
not feel animosity toward anyone. (3) Kindness teaches one to be merciful
and is a practical way of expressing one’s love; therefore be kind and give.
(4) “Mine and thine” are traps of maya that bind one with strong chains of
attachment; do not become attached. (5) Do not possess anything, even a

house of your own; preoccupation with accumulating wealth is hoarding and
is a reflection of greed. (6) Egoism and pride reduce one to nothingness, for
the ego makes one petty and separates him from the whole; full effort should
be made to purify the ego. (7) When reaping the fruits of his actions, one
should learn to be content; contentment is the highest of all wealth, and
without it one remains unsatisfied and frustrated. (8) Expectation is a longing
for enjoyment, and whether it is fulfilled or not, it creates dependency and
robs the human dignity; expectation should be abandoned. (9) One should
practice self-control, without which the mind cannot be made one-pointed
and the energies cannot be concentrated. (10) A tranquil mind is undisturbed
in all situations, favorable or unfavorable; one who has developed tranquility
never grieves and is never deluded. (11) Determination builds courage and
will power and leads to success in all spheres of life. (12) Firmness is a virtue
that leads to fearlessness and self-reliance. (13) Non-attachment helps one to
attain spiritual heights; it is the total absence of the desire for enjoyment. (14)
Negative emotions lead one to extremes; positive emotions can be
substituted, for example love in place of hate. (15) Giving up the fruits of
one’s actions brings great joy, freedom, and peace; one who gives up
everything is the greatest lover of mankind. (16) One should remain a
witness, a seer, not identifying himself with the seen. (17) With mind, action,
and speech, one should be pure, free from stains and faults. (18) One should
be vigilant, for carelessness becomes a stumbling block. (19) The desire for
fruits is a hindrance in the path of skillful actions; give up that desire. (20)
One who loves all receives love from all; the expression of love should be
practiced in daily behavior by giving the best one has. (21) One who has
totally dedicated his mind, heart, and intellect is a true yogi. (22) One who is
courageous can face any calamity of life; he remains even in all conditions.
(23) Faith is the greatest of all virtues provided it is based on pure reason and
not mere belief. All of these virtues are the signs and symptoms of the great
devotees of the Lord. Blessed are they who work hard to acquire these virtues
and attain perfection.
This chapter is devoted to the path of bhakti yoga, the path of love and
devotion. Many students think that this is the easiest path, and many consider
it to be a path of emotionalism, but that is not the case. To love and to be in
love is not easy. The path of devotion and love is as difficult as the paths of
jnana and karma yoga. In fact it is more difficult because it requires singlepointed devotion toward the Lord alone, with purity of mind and heart. It is a

conscious dissolution of one’s individuality in the love of God. The path of
love is full of giving without any expectation of reward whatsoever. It is not
mere emotionalism but the height of ecstasy where the lover and beloved
become one and inseparable. In this path there is no duality; there is no place
for two. As the river meets the ocean, they become inseparably one. So it is
in the path of devotion. Fortunate are those who are in love with the mighty
Lord and remember His name in every breath. They remain free from the
pangs of death. They are free from the rounds of births and deaths, for they
remain wedded with the Eternal.
Here ends the twelfth chapter, in which the virtues that lead one to
perfection are explained.

Chapter Thirteen
Knowledge of the Field and the Knower

Arjuna said
1. I wish to know your primordial nature (Prakriti) and your conscious
principle (Purusha)—the field and the field-knower, knowledge and the
knowable—O Krishna.

The Blessed Lord said
2. O Son of Kunti, this body is called afield. He who knows this, him the
experts in this matter call the field-knower.
After imparting the knowledge of bhakti yoga, the yoga of divine love,
Sri Krishna explains to Arjuna that the body is like a field that yields the
ambrosial fruit. When the aspirant knows the importance of this field and
knows the difference between the field and its knower, he finally realizes the
Self. It is essential to have profound knowledge of the body and to look after
it with utmost care. One who knows the importance of this body and knows
that it is in the possession of Atman is wise indeed. Such an aspirant uses his
body as an instrument to attain the purpose of life. In this chapter the word

kshetra (field) is used to signify the body and kshetrajna (field knower) the
individual soul. It is the duty of every human being to fully know the field in
the form of the body. The field is both an individual’s body and the body of
the Lord. When one is realized, he is aware that the whole universe is his
body.
The Lord alone is the proprietor of all the bodies in the universe, for He
alone pervades all the bodies and has profound knowledge of them. The
infinite bodies of this universe are like the fields of one farmer, the Lord.
There is nothing that is not known by the Lord. The inner dweller in the
human body is Atman, which is eternal and infinite in its essential nature.
When the aspirant realizes his true Self, such a Purusha (individual soul)
becomes a purushottama (the best of souls), for he attains Godhood. When
the aspirant knows that there is no difference between himself and the
universal form of the Lord, he realizes that he is Atman and that the whole
universe is his field. The same Atman that dwells within him dwells in all of
the universe. The relationship between Atman and the body, the knower and
the field, and that between Atman and the universe is the same. Every
aspirant should acquire knowledge of this relationship. If that knowledge is
not gained, one’s knowledge is false knowledge or illusion. Ordinary human
beings suffer because of such false knowledge. Sri Krishna explains to
Arjuna that the body is like a field, and the individual soul is the knower.
Only the knowledge of both is considered to be true knowledge. Atman is the
Lord of the body. As the beads of a necklace have a thread that passes
through them, so the multifaceted universe has the universal Self running
through and sustaining it.
Body and individual soul are related to one another in the same way that
Prakriti is related to Purusha. The universe is the outcome of two
fundamental principles of one Absolute without a second: Purusha
(consciousness) and Prakriti (primordial matter). From Prakriti and Purusha
all the animate and inanimate forms of the world are born, maintained, and
destroyed. Nothing can exist without the Lord’s Prakriti. All the
manifestations in the universe are diverse forms of Prakriti.

3. Know Me, O Descendant of Bharata, as the field-knower in all fields;
that which is the knowledge of the field and of the field-knower, I hold that
to be the true knowledge.
4. What that field is, of what kind, causing what products, and produced
from what, and of what power and effect it is, hear that from Me briefly—
When the aspirant attains profound knowledge of both Atman and the
body, jnana and vijnana, he is fulfilled. In Upanishadic philosophy that
knowledge is called the knowledge of discrimination through which one
knows the difference between the real Self, Atman, and the temporal,
mundane, or apparent reality of the phenomenal world. That knowledge
should be imparted early in life so that one can know life as it is. During
ancient times the serious student, called a brahmachari, lived in an ashram
and practiced celibacy until the age of twenty-five. He devoted himself to
learning that knowledge with a one-pointed mind. Different words have been
used to designate that knowledge, but the knowledge of the Self and nonSelf, of Atman and the phenomenal reality, of Purusha and Prakriti, of
knower and the field is one and the same. In the Brahma Sutra the same
knowledge that is imparted here is described in a well preserved and
conclusive manner. Many sages of the past have also expounded that
knowledge in various ways.

5. As sung of by the sages variously and by manifold Vedic mantras in
different ways, as well as by the words of the sutras that teach about
Brahman and that are definitive and logical.
6. The five great elements, ego, intelligence, and the unmanifest, the ten
and one senses, as well as the five pastures of the senses;

7. Desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, the whole organism, awareness,
sustenance—this is illustrated briefly as the field together with its products.
In these verses Sri Krishna lists all of the components of Prakriti, the
field. They are the constituents of the human body and the universe: earth,
water, fire, wind, and space; ego sense; intelligence; non-manifest Prakriti;
the senses of smell, taste, sight, touch, and hearing; the mouth, hands, feet,
and the organs of procreation and excretion; mind; the five objects of the
senses (smell, taste, form, touch, and sound); desire; hatred, pleasure and
pain; the organism—aggregate of all; sentience; and sustenance. With these
last seven entities Prakriti becomes thirty-onefold, and that thirty-onefold
Prakriti is called the field. All of its constituents go through modification and
change by intermixing and are thus able to create different forms. These
modifications are constantly changing into various forms. They are the
components from which the universe is built.

8. Absence of self-praise, freedom from hypocrisy, non-violence,
forgiveness, simplicity, service to the teacher, purity, stillness, self control;
9. A dispassionate attitude toward the objects of the senses, as well as the
absence of ego, observing the flow of painfulness in birth, death, old age,
and illness;
10. Freedom from attraction, freedom from attachment toward progeny,
spouse, home, and so forth, and ever remaining even-minded when

confronted with desirables or undesirables;
11. Undeviating devotion toward Me with single-minded yoga, fondness
for solitary places, not delighting in gatherings of people;
12. Always dwelling in spiritual knowledge, insight into the meaning of
true nature—this is said to be knowledge. Other than this is ignorance.
These verses focus on putting knowledge into practice. To merely know
something intellectually is not to have profound knowledge of it. We all
know what to do and what not to do, but we do not know how to actualize
that knowledge. Each of us understands certain fundamental truths about how
to live, yet we do not know how to put them into practice. It is important to
understand those truths from a practical viewpoint. In childhood one is
instructed in all the fundamentals: to be good, nice, kind, and gentle. Yet he
is not taught how to bring them into practice. Practicing truth is different
from learning to know truth. These five verses describe qualities that are
systematically developed in the path of yoga.
Pride, conceit, and thoughts of hurting and injuring others are
characteristics of the ignorant. Kindness, gentleness, love, forgiveness,
straightforwardness, service to one’s elders and preceptors, and the steady
practice of spirituality are the virtues and characteristics of the wise aspirant.
If those qualities are lacking, one remains ignorant. All the virtues and
weaknesses should be understood, and the virtues should be cultivated with
all sincerity and firmness of will.
The student should practice these principles, which will enable him to
expand his consciousness and to fathom the higher levels of consciousness.
Then he is clearly treading the path of spirituality. For example, if one wants
to practice loving others he should understand and practice ahimsa—nonharming, non-injuring, and non-hurting. If he is still running after sense
enjoyments, craving the pleasures of the world, attached and haunted by
worldly desire, then he is ignorant. That is not the path of spirituality. The
first step of knowledge makes one aware of his shortcomings, and in the
second step he learns to remove them. In the third step he acquires virtues
like ahimsa, which is the singular expression of love. In the fourth step one
completely abstains from those actions that are injurious to his growth.
Those who have firm faith in the inner dweller and who devotedly love
the inner dweller, Atman, as the Lord of life are not attached to spouse,
children, or home. When one attains evenness he loses all attachment to

externals and strengthens his love for the true Self alone. Such an aspirant
isolates himself and devotes his time and energy toward spiritual sadhana. He
prefers to be in meditation and to remain in the company of the sages. But
those who scratch the surface of the mundane world with their hearts filled
with desires and who are not aware of the true Self within are ignorant. By
studying the behavior of both the sages and the ignorant, one can see that
their paths are totally opposite. One is the path of light and the other the path
of darkness; one is the path of knowledge and the other is the path of
ignorance. A person’s behavior reflects certain characteristics that indicate
whether he is knowledgeable or not. By studying human behavior—how one
talks, thinks, and acts—we can understand who is on the path of knowledge
and who is not. Kindness, forgiveness, non-attachment, and self-control are
characteristics of the knowledgeable, whereas pride, conceit, hatred, egotism,
attachment, and the desire for worldly enjoyments are characteristics of the
ignorant.

13. That which is the worthy object of knowledge I shall teach you,
knowing which, one attains immortality. It is beginningless, supreme
Brahman, which is said to be neither existent nor nonexistent.
14. With hands and feet in all directions, with eyes, heads, and faces in
all directions, having ears everywhere, He dwells covering everything in the
world.
15. Appearing as though having attributes of all the senses yet devoid of
all senses, unattached yet bearer of all, free of gunasyet receiver of gunas
—

16. Immobile yet moving inside and outside beings, unknowable because
of Its subtlety, It dwells far and is near.
17. Undivided in the beings yet remaining as though divided, bearer of
all the beings is that object of knowledge, the consumer and also the
creator.
There is an Upanishadic prayer that states: “Lead me from the unreal to
the real, from darkness to light, from mortality to immortality.” Since ancient
times man has been seeking immortality, something permanent, not darkness
but light. The human being is striving to attain immortality, but he does not
find anything immortal in the external world. The interior researcher knows
that immortality resides in the depths of every human being. To attain that,
the aspirant should first dive into the deepest level of his being. The highest
of truths is beyond all comprehension by the human senses and mind. One
should not waste his time and energy searching outside for that which is
deeply buried within the tomb of the human body. That which is
imperishable, unchangeable, without beginning and end, completely
unattached, and shining with all its splendor resides in Its glory, all-pervading
power, and majesty both within and without. It is very near and yet very far,
undivided yet appearing to be divided. It is the only One to be known, for It
is the highest Self, remaining ever present in the inner chamber of every
being.
The student should practice to attain the profound knowledge of the
highest Lord. From mortality to immortality, from the temporal to eternity is
the only way of realizing the Truth. In this inward path, the student first
learns to be non-attached, to have a one-pointed mind, and to remain content.
This inward journey finally leads the aspirant to the abode of immortality.

18. That light of lights is said to be beyond darkness. The knowledge yet
the object of knowledge, the goal of knowledge. It is established in the heart
of all.
19. Thus briefly I have stated the field as well as knowledge and the
objects of knowledge. Knowing this My devotee becomes ready for
becoming Me.
20. Know the primordial nature Prakriti as well as the conscious
principle Purusha both to be beginningless. Know the gunas as well as the
products (vikaras) to be born of Prakriti.
21. Prakriti is said to be the cause in the matter of effect, instrument, and
agency. Purusha is said to be the cause in apperception of pleasures and
pains.
When the aspirant understands the temporal and the Absolute, the field
and the knower, he attains the highest state of truth. Compared to the knower
(the Self), the field (the body) does not last for a long time. But that does not
mean that the aspirant should not understand the body or that he should
ignore it and not look after it, for the kshetra is the field of action through
which creativity, arts, and the sciences find their expression. It is important to
understand both units of life: the temporal (body, breath, senses, and mind)
and the Self.
The yogi should learn to keep his body healthy so that he can attain the
goal of life. Knowledge and the field of its expression should be understood
clearly. The body can become a means but if not looked after, it can create a
stumbling block and barrier. Loving the Self does not mean ignoring the body
any more than loving someone means hating others. Our master used to say
that the real Self should be loved, but at the same time hatred should not be
created for the body. When the student goes to the deeper levels of his being,
there is a tendency to ignore the body. But he should not forget that a healthy
body is always a means, whereas a sickly body demands the attention of the
sadhaka and interferes with his practice. Both a healthy body and a sound
mind are essential for the sadhaka.
Sri Krishna reminds Arjuna that Purusha and Prakriti, the Lord and His
power of manifestation, are ancient and without beginning. The student
should know the modifications arising out of Prakriti and should know that
effect and cause reside together in the causal form in Prakriti. When the

individual soul becomes attached to the desire to experience pleasure, it also
experiences misery, for in the absence of one the other exists. These two pairs
of opposites arise from a single cause; that which is the cause of pleasure is
also the cause of misery.

22. The conscious spirit Purusha, only dwelling within Prakriti,
perceives the Prakriti-bound gunas. The cause of His birth in the good and
bad bodies is His connection with the gunas.
23. Close observer, consenter, bearer and experiencer is the great
Sovereign. The supreme Spirit in this body is also called the supreme Self,
Parama-atman.
In these two verses the student is asked to be a witness exactly as one’s
real Self is a witness. When the student practices meditation and withdraws
the senses from the external world, his mind is not distracted and disturbed
by the dissipation of the senses. But even at that stage he has to encounter the
flow rushing from the unconscious, which is the reservoir of all memories,
impressions, samskaras, and merits and demerits of one’s current and
previous lives. How can one deal with such thoughts when they present
themselves during meditation? If the meditator learns to observe his thoughts
and all that comes from the unconscious—symbols, ideas, fancies, and
fantasies—and does not become involved or identify himself with them, he
can remain a witness. Without attaining that state, meditation is incomplete.
The One who dwells in the heart of the cosmos is the same One who dwells
in the body. In the individual body He is the master, and He is the same
master and knower of the universe. Just as one and the same space is in the
cup, in the room, and outside, the all-pervading Self is everywhere.
When the student is firmly established in the knowledge that the inner
dweller, Atman, the supreme Self, resides in the body and also knows the
external, mundane, and temporal world well, then whatever actions he
performs do not create bondage for him. The aspirant who knows the pure
Self, its manifestation, and its qualities and then learns to live in the world is

free from the necessity of rebirth.

24. He who knows the conscious spirit Purusha as well as the primordial
nature Prakriti together with the attributes (gunas), even though operating
in every way, he is not bound again.
25. Some see the Self by the Self within the Self through meditation;
others by Samkhya or by yoga and yet others by the yoga of action.
26. Others not knowing thus, worship upon hearing from others. They
too, intent upon learning from others, yet certainly conquer death.
Sri Krishna distinguishes between four paths and says that Selfrealization can be attained by each of those paths. On one path the aspirants
practice the yoga of meditation to attain sarnadhi. In that path the journey
from the gross self to the subtlemost Self is trodden systematically by the raja
yogis and dhyana yogis. Those yogis practice ashtanga yoga, the eight limbs
of yoga: yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,
and samadhi. Yama consists of five practices that help one relate to others
with a sense of oneness, and niyama is comprised of five practices that lead
to self-purification. Asana helps one to prepare the body for meditation
through physical postures. Through pranayama one regulates the lungs,
breath, and vital energy. Thus one prepares himself through his actions,
postures, and breath to enable him to sit for meditation without being
distracted by such things as the remembrance of deeds improperly performed,
discomfort of the body, or irregular breathing. The aspirant next learns how
to withdraw his senses (pratyahara) and then to concentrate his mind
(dharana). Prolonged one-pointed concentration leads to meditation (dhyana),
and prolonged steady meditation leads to samadhi.
Other aspirants tread the path of knowledge. They study the scriptures
attentively and contemplate on the teachings of the Upanishads, the Brahma

Sutra, and the Bhagavad Gita. When their contemplation is strengthened by
pure reason, their buddhi becomes discriminative, and they understand the
difference between the pure Self and the mere self. That is the path of
knowledge, which finally leads the aspirant to Self-realization.
There is another group of aspirants who attain spiritual heights by
performing their duties and dedicating all the fruits of their actions. They
understand the nature of Prakriti and its gunas: sattva, rajas, and tamas. They
perform their actions without any attachment and thus reach the highest level
of consciousness. The fourth group of aspirants is not learned. They depend
on the teachings imparted to them by the sages, and they strictly follow that
knowledge with full faith and devotion. Their path is the path of devotion and
faith, and it is faith that leads them across the mire of delusion. Having a pure
heart and unflinching faith, they reach the shore of life. Various are the paths
followed by the many aspirants for attaining spiritual knowledge. All those
who make sincere efforts reach the summit.

27. So long as any entities, moving or unmoving, are born, know that to
be through the union of the field and the field-knower, O Bull among
Bharatas.
28. Dwelling alike in all beings, the supreme Sovereign, not perishing
among the perishing things—he who sees Him, he truly sees.
Teaching the yoga of equanimity, Sri Krishna says to Arjuna that
whatever we find in the world, animate and inanimate, is the creation of the
Self, Purusha, and its power of manifestation, Prakriti. The Self is the
knower, the supreme reality, and Prakriti is its field, the manifestation that we
see in various names and forms all over the universe. All that comes into
existence, whether sentient or insentient, arises from the union of Purusha
and Prakriti. These two fundamental principles are the principles of the one
Absolute without a second. Purusha controls Prakriti as the body is controlled
by its knower. This very Purusha is called Atman. Atman dwells equally
everywhere in all things and beings of the universe. The aspirant who has the

profound knowledge of the unchanging, everlasting, and eternal knows the
Truth. He sees Truth everywhere and in everything. He remains undisturbed,
for he has attained the state of equanimity.

29. Seeing the Lord dwelling in everyone equally, one does not violate
the Self by the self. Thereby he reaches the supreme state.
All living beings and objects of the world appear to be distinct from one
another, but in reality they are the modifications of one and the same Truth.
Distinctions in name, form, and size are only apparent and not permanent.
There are countless ripples, waves, and bubbles in the ocean, but they are one
and the same water. As there are innumerable rays of sunlight coming from a
single source, the aspirant knows that the different modes of the objects of
the universe arise from one and the same Brahman.

30. He alone sees who sees the Self as not a doer, and who sees that all
acts are performed by Prakriti alone in every way,
The wise person knows that Atman is not the doer, that all actions are
carried out by Prakriti. It is the material nature that is responsible for all the
actions and happenings going on in the universe and in the individual. Atman
remains the witness. One who has attained this knowledge has realized the
Self.

31. When he observes the separate being of all beings united in one, and
all expansion from the very same, then he becomes Brahman.
32. Being devoid of attributes, this supreme Self (Parama-atman)—
though dwelling in the body, O Son of Kunti—neither acts nor is tainted by
action.
33. Just as the all-pervading sky is not tainted in its subtleness, similarly,
this A tman dwelling everywhere in the body is not smeared.
34. Just as the single sun illuminates this entire world, so the field-owner
illuminates the entire field, O Descendant of Bharata.
The highest Self is the Self of all without any beginning or end, unborn,
and timeless. Therefore it is eternal. A well-known prayer of the Upanishads
says that the absolute truth is full and if the full is taken from the full, that
fullness is not diminished. If something is added to It, It still remains the
same. Subtraction and addition do not create any change, for It is always full.
The three qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas are not in the Self, for the Self
is beyond qualities and attributes. It is untainted by the manifestation of
illusory forms that appear to be incomplete, in conflict, and in many cases to
suffer. It is not tainted by the defects or blemishes of the apparent reality. All
actions are performed by the body. The Self remains aloof and unaffected,
free from all stains and impurities.

35. Those who thus know with the eye of knowledge the difference
between the field and the field-knower, as well as the release from the

primordial nature Prakriti, which is the origin of elements, they reach the
transcendent.
Human eyes can only see so far; they have limited capacity and are
bound by a limited horizon. But those who have attained intuitive knowledge
have divine insight and can fathom all the levels of consciousness within and
without. Such wise ones do not suffer from pride, egotism, or self-conceit, for
their vision is not hindered by the limitations of the senses and the mind. The
knowledge that flows through the ordinary mind is not pure and profound,
but the knowledge that is received through divine or yogic insight is perfect.
One should remember that such knowledge is not received bit by bit but is
received with all its profundity and fullness. That knowledge flows from its
timeless and infinite source. It is called intuitive knowledge. Pure, unalloyed
knowledge of the infinite alone liberates the aspirant from the cruel clutches
of Prakriti. Such an aspirant is detached and performs his duties selflessly. He
remains in boundless joy, always full of delight. We human beings are the
children of eternity, infinite happiness, and joy, and each of us can experience
this true nature of ours.
Here ends the thirteenth chapter, in which the knowledge of the Self
and the body, the universe and its Knower, the supreme Self is
described.

Chapter Fourteen
The Profound Knowledge of the Three
Gunas

The Blessed Lord said
1. A gain I shall teach you the transcendent knowledge, the highest of
sciences, knowing which, all meditators have gone from here to supreme
adepthood.
2. Resorting to this knowledge, reaching homogeneity with Me, they are
not born even at the new cycle of creation, nor do they suffer at dissolution.
Having described the field of action and the knower of the field, Sri
Krishna now leads Arjuna beyond the spheres of the field so that he can
attain supreme knowledge. The knowledge that fulfills the purpose of life and
leads one to completeness is considered to be the highest knowledge. There
are many steps to that supreme knowledge, the final stage of attainment being
complete liberation. When the Self is realized, the aspirant no longer fears
birth or death. Here Sri Krishna describes that state that is beyond life here
and hereafter. He says that when the universe returns to its primordial state
after its dissolution, there is manifestation again. But the realized being
remains unaffected by both annihilation and manifestation. He is one with
Atman and is not subject to change, death, and rebirth. He has reached a state

of immortality that gives him freedom from all bondage.

3. My may a is the womb (yoni), identical with Me, who am the great
Brahman; I impregnate that; from there the birth of all beings occurs, O
Descendant of Bharata.
4. All the forms that arise in all the species, O Son of Kunti, I, Brahman,
am their seedgiving father, the great origin (yoni).
The supreme Self is self-existent and is the father of all, and Prakriti is
the mother of the entire universe. The supreme Lord sows Its seed in Prakriti
from which are born and arise all beings. Thus the whole universe manifests.
Every aspirant should know and remember that his vessel of life contains the
seed of the supreme Lord. He is the child of the Lord, and just as a child, he
only needs to allow the seed to grow so that he becomes the father. When the
student becomes aware of this truth that the supreme imperishable seed of
eternal life is already within him, he makes sincere efforts to allow it to grow.
Then he attains Godhood: the human being eventually becomes divine.

5. Sattva, rajas, tamas—these attributes born of Prakriti bind the
immutable bodybearer in the body, O Mighty-armed One.
6. Of these, sattva, illuminator and healthy because of its immaculateness, binds through the attraction of pleasure as well as the attraction
of knowledge, O Sinless One.
7. Know rajas to have the nature of attraction and color, producing
craving and attachment. O Son of Kunti, it binds the bodybearer through
attachment to action.
8. Know tamas to be born of ignorance, the stupefier of all body-owners.
O Descendant of Bharata, it binds through negligence, sloth, and sleep.
9. Sattva causes attachment to happiness, rajas to action, O Descendant
of Bharata. Tamas, however, veiling knowledge, causes attachment to
inattention.
All that we see here, there, and everywhere, all the objects of this
universe, have been manifested by the three gunas of Prakriti. With the help
of these three gunas, Prakriti manifests the universe. Sattva, rajas, and tamas
are distinct, yet they function in coordination with one another. The sattva
guna is peaceful, calm, and serene; rajas is active, sensual, and full of desires,
attachments, and enjoyments; tamas produces sloth, inertia, confusion,
delusion, and ignorance. The aspirant should always be vigilant, watching
that tamas and rajas remain tamed with the help of sattva so that he can
continue on the path undisturbed and undistracted. In order to accomplish
this, earnest effort should be made, and one should meditate regularly.
When sattva is predominant the aspirant remains serene and happy.
Elevating thoughts dawn during that time. The sattva quality is full of delight,
enlightening, and very helpful for maintaining mental and emotional
equilibrium. Without it, psychosomatic imbalances that lead to various kinds
of disorders occur. When the sattva quality is not predominant, one
experiences a lack of calmness, happiness, and joy. The mind then remains in
a state of turmoil, full of conflict and confusion. But when the sattva quality
is cultivated by the aspirant, he remains in a state of perpetual joy.
Rajas creates raga (attraction or attachment) and dvesha (aversion or
hatred) toward the objects of the world. One whose life is controlled by rajas
remains continually active, for he constantly pursues the objects of pleasure.
He is never satisfied and is always seeking new sources of pleasure. That way
of being can lead to hypertension and many other diseases and does not allow

the student to discipline and control himself. Often the student functions
under the sway of unconscious habits of a rajasic nature and acts without
knowing and understanding why he is doing so.
Criminals when interrogated confess that they knew they should not
have acted in the way that they did but that they committed their offenses out
of habit. It is rajas that led them to act and to create a division within and
without. So even when they know what to do, they cannot act on that
knowledge. The conflict that is created within by rajas leads to serious
crimes, and crime is a disease that needs to be treated. Because of mistakes in
the social order, either at home or in school, many people do not get proper
attention and education. As a result, they form habits that are injurious to
themselves and others. Rajas can also be directed positively and can lead one
to be creative and constructive. It is an active force, and if properly utilized, it
can do tremendous good for both the individual and mankind.
Tamas is sloth and inertia; it produces ignorance and destroys the sense
of discrimination. It creates delusion, and then one cannot decide things on
time. Thus it leads one to inaction. A lazy aspirant remains in a state of
sleepiness and lethargy, and in such a state of mind the aspirant goes through
negative withdrawal. For him life is full of gloom; he does not experience joy
or delight. Such people become fat and flabby and are prone to disease.
Tamas leads one to many illnesses; tamasic people become passive and suffer
from all the diseases related to passivity. They do not want to move; they
remain in a semi-conscious state. They are controlled by negative emotions;
they are depressed, dependent, and helpless. Life becomes burdensome for
them.
The entire universe is a drama enacted by the gunas. The three gunas
exist in everything, including all human beings. They are the motivating force
in the drama of life. Almost everywhere, one guna is predominant and the
other two are relatively dormant. They are hardly ever in a state of
equilibrium. Equilibrium is experienced only by those sadhakas who practice
physical, mental, and spiritual discipline.

10. Overcoming rajas and tamas, sattva prevails, O Descendant of
Bharata; rajas prevails overcoming sattva and tamas; similarly tamas
prevails overcoming sattva and rajas.
11. When the light of knowledge waxes in all the doors of this body, then
one should know sattva to have increased.
12. Greed, activity, the initiation of actions, absence of peace,
competitiveness—these are born when rajas has increased, O Bull among
Bharatas.
13. Absence of light, lack of initiative, inattention as well as stupefaction
—these are produced when tamas has increased, O Prince of the Kurus.
The qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas dwell in every human mind.
According to the circumstances, one is predominant and the other two are
relatively inactive. When rajas and tamas remain latent, sattva predominates,
and when sattva and rajas remain dormant, tamas comes to the fore. These
strands of Prakriti constantly intervene in human life. When sattva guna
enables the light of knowledge to dawn, one becomes a sage. When rajas
predominates, the desire for enjoyment victimizes the human mind. One then
loses all sense of discrimination, and he gears his life toward the attainment
of enjoyment. When both sattva and rajas remain latent, one goes to a state of
pitifulness; he does nothing creative and thinks nothing useful.
Some commentators and scholars say that one should constantly
cultivate the sattva guna in order to attain a state of perfection, and others say
one should have equilibrium and balance in the three qualities. There is yet
another view that one should go beyond all three gunas. Actually these are
progressive steps in the inward journey toward perfection. In the beginning
the aspirant should not allow the tamasic quality to raise its head. He should

prevent his mind from going to the grooves of negativity and passivity. Lack
of confidence and lack of success in life lead one to such a negative state.
In the next step the student should learn not to waste his energy trying to
attain the objects of pleasure. Such activity robs one of his inner strength,
which is the very basis of human advancement and unfoldment. The student
should abstain from actions and activities that lead him to a preoccupation
with sense enjoyment. When he is able to tame and keep tamas and rajas
under control, he starts to cultivate the sattva quality—a delightful and joyous
state of mind that leads one in the path of meditation and contemplation.
Without going through the process and establishing sattva guna as the
predominant current in one's life, meditation and contemplation remain mere
techniques and have little value.
When one breathes primarily from the left nostril, tamas holds sway;
when he breathes through the right nostril, a rajasic state is evident; and when
the breath flows equally through both nostrils, he is in a sattvic state. To
establish sattva guna the aspirant learns to apply sushumna with the help of
pranayama techniques and meditation, in which mind and breath are wellcoordinated. Then both breaths begin flowing freely rather than one
predominating over the other. In such a state the mind experiences joy and
likes to meditate instead of wanting to go out to the objects of the world. The
mind then prefers to go to the inner recesses where it finds more delight and
attains a state of equilibrium.
After cultivating sattva guna, the student progresses to the final state.
Then none of the gunas has any hold over him. When the student has realized
the Self, he has gone beyond all the gunas and nothing affects him. His vision
remains unalloyed, untainted, and pure. Each commentator has his own
viewpoint. Here Sri Krishna teaches Arjuna to cultivate sattva and then to
perform his actions selflessly.

14. When a bodybearer comes to death during an increase of sattva, then
he attains the immaculate worlds of those of high knowledge.
15. Upon dying in rajas, one is born among those who are drawn to

action. Similarly, dying in tamas, one is born among stupefied species.
Those who have realized the Self, who are in the Self, and who have
become one with the Self are never reborn. Those rare sages become
inseparably one with the supreme Self and are beyond the influence of the
gunas. They have crossed the mire of delusion and maya. They are liberated
forever.
If the sages who have cultivated sattva guna prefer to stay in the highest
of heavenly states when they depart from this mortal world, they can do so.
And if they wish to be reborn, they take birth in the homes of wise parents.
But those people who cast off their bodies under the predominance of rajas
are reborn in the homes of those who are active in attaining worldly pleasures
and the objects of the world. If tamas is predominant when one drops off the
body, he is reborn in a dull, dumb, and desolate family, a family in which
sloth and inertia rule.

16. The fruit of a meritorious act is sattvic and stainless, but the fruit of
rajas is pain, and the fruit of tamas is ignorance.
17. Knowledge is born from sattva and greed from rajas; inattention and
stupefaction as well as ignorance arise from tamas.
18. The sattva-dwellers rise upward; the rajasic remain in the middle;
tamasic ones, remaining under the influence of base qualities, move
downward.
How can one have a pleasant death and prepare himself for the life
hereafter? Life is but a brief sentence, ending with a comma and no period.
By analyzing life between the two commas of birth and death, the profound
knowledge of the whole sentence is not grasped. The whole of life thus
remains unknown. Death is a preparation for another birth, and death and
birth are two transition points that mark the next step in the path of light. Life

should be a preparation for the never ending journey to the infinite.
Those who perform good actions without attachment to the fruits of their
actions are sattvikas. Their actions and fruits are totally dedicated to the
whole of mankind, and they are liberated from the bonds and ties of karma.
Even after dropping their mortal bodies, they are born again to perform more
actions, for actions are like worship for them. They rejoice in being born
again and again to breathe an eternal prayer and to perform their actions
skillfully and selflessly. Actions performed in such a way are sattvic and
liberating. But those who perform actions with selfish motivation are rajasic,
and their actions lead to pain. Such people presume that death is painful and
remain tormented by the fear of death. And those who are tamasic remain in
the darkness of ignorance, completely dependent on fate. Fate leads them to
lowly rebirth.
From sattva arises knowledge, from rajas desire is born, and from tamas
comes ignorance. Those who have profound knowledge of sattva march
upward toward the summit; those who are rajasic can only go up so far and
remain in the middle; those who are tamasic are not aware of their path, their
potentials, or the creative aspect of life.

19. When the seer observes no agents of action other than the gunas and
knows the transcendent beyond the gunas, he attains the state of being Me.
20. The bodybearer, transcending these three body-creating gunas, freed
from the sorrows called birth, old age, and death, enjoys immortality.
The perfect seer, well established in the supreme Self, knows that all the
gunas create the play of the universe and that Atman is not the doer.
Therefore he does not become involved and entangled in the play of the
gunas. He knows that the real Self remains above the gunas, unaffected and
untouched. The body functions because of the three gunas, but the sage is
free from identification with body consciousness. Therefore he is free from
death, birth, old age, and misery. He has already attained immortality.

Arjuna asked
21. With what characteristics is that one endowed who has transcended
the three gunas, O Lord? What is his conduct? Having transcended the
gunas, in what manner does he conduct himself?

The Blessed Lord said
22. Illumination, activity, as well as delusion, O Pandava—he is not
adverse to these when they are operant nor does he desire them when they
have ceased.
23. He who sits in neutrality is not moved by the gunas; he observes
merely that 'they operate with one another' and does not respond.
24. A like to pain and pleasure, Self-dwelling, beholding a lump of clay,
stone, and nugget of gold as the same, holding the pleasant and unpleasant
as equal, endowed with wisdom, alike to praise or censure,
25. A like in honor and dishonor, equal to the friendly or hostile sides,
renouncing all endeavor, he is said to have transcended the gunas.
Arjuna wants to know how to recognize one who has gone beyond the
gunas, and he asks how such a person behaves. Sri Krishna says that sattva
emanates light, rajas activity, and tamas delusion. In all conditions, whether

he is a success or a failure, the person who is sattvic remains content. Finally
he goes beyond all the gunas. He remains aloof and unaffected in all
situations. In the midst of the play of the gunas, he is neither inspired by
sattva nor angered by the play of tamas. No matter what happens, he remains
undisturbed, knowing that all the plays and melodramas are arranged by the
gunas. He is not imbalanced in either gain or loss. Sattva does not imbalance
him, and he is not affected by the grief and sorrow created by rajas and
tamas. He maintains his evenness equally in honor and dishonor. Observing
such signs and symptoms, the aspirant can identify one who has risen above
the play of the gunas.

26. And he who serves Me with an undeviated yoga of devotion, fully
transcending the gunas, he is fit to become Brahman.
27. I am the fundament of the immortal and immutable Brahman, of
eternal law (dharma) and of ultimate happiness.
To cross the mire of delusion created by the three gunas, the aspirant
needs to have one-pointed devotion and complete dedication to the supreme
Lord alone. Without purification of mind, single-minded devotion is not
possible. And without single-minded devotion, one is not able to attain the
highest Brahman. The supreme Lord is the final abode. He is immortal and
imperishable. He plans the eternal laws of dharma. He is full of peace and
bliss.
Here ends the fourteenth chapter, in which the three gunas and the
state beyond are explained.

Chapter Fifteen
The Eternal Tree of Life

The Blessed Lord said
1. With roots upward, with branches downward, there is said to be an
immutable fig tree (ashvattha) whose leaves are the Vedic verses. He who
knows that knows the Vedas.
2. A bove and below are spread out its branches, grown through the
gunas, with objects of the senses as the shoots; and the roots are spread out
below, resulting in the bondage of actions in the human world.
The Bhagavad Gita is a modified version of the Vedas and the
Upanishads. The eternal tree of the universe described in these verses is also
mentioned in the Katha Upanishad, Mundaka Upanishad, Atharva Veda, and
Rig Veda. The phenomenal world is compared to a tree whose roots are in the
heavens and whose branches spread upward and downward. One who knows
that tree is called learned in Vedic knowledge, for that tree contains all the
Vedic verses as its leaves. Its shade gives comfort to tired and weary
scholars. The gunas cause the pleasant sense objects to blossom in that tree of
the universe. Sound, touch, color, form, taste, and smell form additional
roots, which spread extensively all over.
The ashvattha (cosmic tree) is described here as an imperishable tree,
although it has been previously stated that this universe is transitory. The

universe is a manifestation of one supreme imperishable reality, and that
absolute reality is all-pervading and exists eternally with all its splendor and
glory. It is immutable. Yet this universe is transitory, for all the objects of the
external universe constantly change as a result of the three gunas, and the
universe itself finally is absorbed into the unmanifest. But after the universe
returns to its unmanifested form, it eventually comes back again to
manifestation exactly as it was before. In this sense it is imperishable. It is
sustained by that which is eternal.
In reality the essential potentiality of anything in the world does not
change at all. The existence of anything in the world remains unchanged; it is
never destroyed. Only the forms and names that it assumes are subject to
change, decay, and destruction. For instance, modern astronomers say that in
aeons to come the sun will become "dead," that it will lose all its fuel and no
longer emanate light. But that is a limited perspective. For the light that the
sun is emanating will even then continue to radiate throughout the universe as
long as the universe exists. That energy may change form, but it never
disappears. And even when the universe itself seems to be dissolved, it still
exists in a potential form. The self-existent reality, the very summum bonum
of life, remains unchangeable. In human life the body changes but not Atman.
Without Atman the body cannot exist; the body exists only because of the
existence of Atman. The tree of life is deeply rooted in the soil of nature and
the power of Atman. Because Atman is imperishable, the tree of life is also
considered to be imperishable.

3. Its form is not apprehended as it appears; it has no end, no beginning,

or foundation. Cutting this tree of very firmly grown roots with the strong
weapon of non-attachment—
4. That higher state should be searched throughout, arriving at which
one no longer returns, saying 'I take recourse in that very Purusha from
whom perennial activity commenced.'
The understanding of the ashvattha tree is beyond the grasp and
comprehension of ordinary people, for their minds remain engrossed in the
objects of enjoyment. They do not think of the consequences that arise from
pursuing sense objects. They think that the transitory and temporal world is
all there is and thus make the enjoyment of the mundane world the goal of
their lives. But those who have carefully examined the phenomenal world
know that they are caught by the snare of deaths and births. When they
understand the basis of their bondage, they also realize that they can cut
themselves free from their entanglements with the powerful weapon of nonattachment. The tree of mundane existence has also grown its roots deeply in
the soil of the mind and heart of man. Only with the help of non-attachment
can those roots be cut. When non-attachment is practiced, the aspirant
becomes free from the bondage created by charms, temptations, and
attractions to the objects of the world. The tree of worldly existence does not
cause bondage for the aspirants who have attained a state of non-attachment.
In the Mundaka Upanishad it is said that there are two birds sitting on
the branches of the same tree of life. One enjoys the fruits of the tree, but the
other remains a witness. The one who enjoys also suffers, but the one who
witnesses is free. When the individual soul remains attached to that which is
in the vast reservoir of the unconscious, the storehouse of merits and
demerits, or impressions and samskaras, he suffers. But the moment he
becomes non-attached, he is free. The aspirant can attain a profound state of
non-attachment and become free forever and ever.

5. Free of pride and delusion, having conquered the stain of attachment,
permanently dwelling in spiritual knowledge, turned away from desires,
liberated from the pairs of opposites named pleasure and pain, the
undeluded ones go to that imperishable state.
6. Neither the sun nor the moon nor the fire illuminates that, going to
which they do not return. That is My supreme abode.
When the aspirant attains freedom from egotism, pride, delusion, and
attachments, he becomes content within. Free from all desires, he attains
wisdom and finally the highest state of knowledge, which is imperishable in
its nature. That knowledge is profound in itself. The light of the sun, moon,
and fire have limitations, but the light of knowledge is the highest of all
lights. No light is able to dispel the darkness of ignorance except the light of
knowledge. The source of all light is in the depths of Atman—not in the sun,
moon, or fire. The latter are just fragments of the Light of lights. The aspirant
whose delusion has been completely dispelled by the light of knowledge
attains the supreme Brahman. Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that the imperishable
Brahman is the final abode of all aspirants.

7. In the world of the living ones, My own eternal particle has become
the soul (jiva); it pulls the senses, with mind as the sixth, whose basis is
Prakriti.
8. Whichever body this Lord attains and from whichever one He departs,
He goes taking the mind and senses along in their repository, like the wind

carrying fragrances.
9. Ruling over the senses of hearing and taste and touch and smell, as
well as the mind, the soul experiences the objects of the senses.
10. The stupefied ones do not observe Him, whether endowed with
gunas, He is departing or staying or experiencing. Only those with the eyes
of knowledge truly see.
11. The yogis, endeavoring, see Him dwelling within the Self; the unwise,
who have not cultivated the Self, do not see Him even though they
endeavor.
The individual soul is a part of the supreme Self. The individual soul
lives consecutively in various bodies. As the breeze carries the fragrance of
the flowers, so the individual soul when casting off the body carries the
samskaras with it. Those samskaras motivate the individual soul to dress up
in another garment, another body, and thus rebirth occurs. The individual
soul is the enjoyer, and the body is like a garment that is changed when it is
no longer useful to that soul. The ignorant are not aware of this, but the
aspirant who follows the path of discipline with full efforts and a one-pointed
mind and who has no desire for external enjoyments realizes the Truth.
The jiva (individual soul) is but a fragment, a tiny part of God. The
space inside a cup, the space in a room, and the space outside are essentially
one and the same. We can impose our own imaginary boundaries on the
space, but the space remains one individual entity. No power ever existed or
will ever exist that can cut the space or divide it into small or big parts. In the
same way, there is no power that can cut the eternal Atman into pieces and
make a small fragment into a jiva. When we see a particular human being, his
form and size, he appears to be separated from the whole, and we call him an
individual. But that experience of separation occurs because the ego is not in
the habit of acknowledging the whole. That makes one think that the
individual soul is only a fragment of the whole. In reality it is not. When the
yogi fathoms all the boundaries from gross to subtle to subtlemost and
crosses all the boundaries of individuality, he realizes that there is nothing but
the real Self, which is the Self of all.

12. That brilliance, which remaining in the sun illuminates the entire
world, that which is in the moon as well as in the fire, know that to be My
brilliance.
13. Having entered the earth, I uphold the beings with energy; I also
nourish all the plants, having become soma whose nature is all juice and
flavor.
14. I, becoming the universal fire in the belly, dwelling in the body of
breathing creatures, joined with prana and apana, digest the four kinds of
food.
15. I am also situated in the heart of all. From Me proceed memory,
knowledge, and negation. I am the subject to be known through all the
Vedas, the author of Vedanta as well as the knower of the Vedas am I
alone.
The blazing sun, the gentle light of the moon, and the golden flames of
the fire belong to the one supreme Self. The power of the supreme Lord
expressed through these manifestations enables the plants to grow, and in
turn gives the vegetable kingdom the capacity to nourish animals and human
beings. The fire of life (prana) that dwells in every human body is the fire
given by the supreme Lord. All intelligence and knowledge have only one
ultimate source. The power of knowledge in the human mind that enables it
to know and to remember also emanates from the supreme Lord. The same
power emanated all the Vedas and Vedanta; all discussions and praises of the
Vedas and Vedanta are devoted to the source of that power. The supreme
Lord exists everywhere. He lives in all beings, and His power prompts all
human beings to function and to do their duties.
It is important for the aspirant to realize that there is only one truth

within and without. That awareness will lead him to the source of the light
that is found in the sun, moon, and stars as well as the light of knowledge,
through which the human being understands and realizes the goal of life: the
Self of all.

16. There are two conscious principles (purushas) in the world:
perishable and imperishable. The perishable one is all the beings, and the
absolute one is said to be imperishable.
17. But the highest conscious principle, Purusha, is elucidated as the
Supreme Self (Parama-atman), the immutable Sovereign, who has entered
and then upholds and nurtures the three worlds.
18. Because I am higher than the perishable and also beyond the
imperishable one, therefore both in the world and in the Vedas I am
glorified as the highest Self.
These verses use two different terms: kshara (perishable) and akshara
(imperishable). In this universe we experience two realities: one is constantly
changing, and the other never changing. One goes through constant birth,
change, death, and destruction; and the other is everlasting with no change at
all. I n human life there are three units: one unit is made up of the body,
breath, senses, and conscious mind; the second consists of the unconscious
mind and the individual soul; and the third is the ultimate eternal reality, the
supreme Self. The first unit is subject to change and destruction, the second is
semi-immortal, and the third is completely immortal. The first and second
exist only because of the power of the third, the supreme Self, which is the
source of life and light and which nourishes and supports the whole universe.
It is the supreme Self that is the highest of all. The sages and Vedas call Him
the supreme Lord.
The aspirant should understand that the body, senses, breath, and

conscious mind are one unit the gross unit of life. That unit constantly
undergoes change, from birth to death. The second unit is the unconscious
mind, which possesses and stores all the impressions and memories within
itself and remains attached as a vehicle to the individual self, jiva. When the
first unit separates from the second unit after death, the unconscious mind
and individual soul continue to exist. When the individual sou! becomes
detached from its vehicle and realizes the supreme Self, one is free from the
rounds of births and deaths and is liberated. When the realization of the
supreme Self is accomplished, the individual soul becomes one with the
supreme Self. The student should understand and firmly know that the
supreme Self resides in the subtlemost recesses of the body and that the
physical body is only an outer and gross sheath. The journey that one should
follow in the course of his life is not a journey in the external world but an
internal journey leading from gross to subtle and finally to the subtlemost
supreme Self.

19. The undeluded one who knows Me this way as the supreme Spirit, he,
all-knowing, devotes himself to Me with his entire being, O Descendant of
Bharata.
20. I have taught you this secretmost science, O Sinless One. A wakening
to this, one becomes endowed with wisdom, fulfilled as to all actions, O
Descendant of Bharata.
As long as one is deluded by external allurements and dissipated by their
various enjoyments, temptations, and attractions, he remains unaware of the
beauty, grandeur, glory, and majesty of the supreme Self. But when the
aspirant possesses the knowledge of both the external and internal worlds and
knows the highest of all, he serves the supreme Self with his full devotion
and dedication. The secret knowledge of the path of Self-realization has been
imparted to Arjuna and to other aspirants. The key is to search, look, and see
within. One who sees the supreme Lord in His wholeness and then does his
duty attains and accomplishes the purpose of life.

Here ends the fifteenth chapter, in which the secret knowledge
imparted to those who are on the path of Self-realization is explained.

Chapter Sixteen
The Destiny of the Sages and of the
Ignorant

The Blessed Lord said
1. Fearlessness, purity of mind, stability in the yoga of knowledge,
charity, control, sacrificial observance, self-study, asceticism, and
simplicity—
2. Non-violence, truth, non-anger, selflessness, peace, and nongossiping, kindness toward all beings, non-greediness, mildness, modesty,
non-fickleness—
3. Brilliance of confidence, forgiveness, sustenance, purity, nonanimosity, not seeking of honor—these appear in one who is highborn in
divine wealth, O Descendant of Bharata.
It is important to cultivate the qualities that make one's path easy and
smooth. Without certain qualities the stumbling blocks, obstacles, and
barriers cannot be removed. For some the path is clear, but for others it is full
of obstructions. Those who are endowed with good qualities find their path to
be easy, whereas those who do not cultivate good qualities constantly create

difficulties for themselves. All follow one and the same path, to the Light of
lights, but each person creates his own problems, confrontations, and
obstacles along the path. Preparation is important before one begins to tread
the path of light. To light the fire one must first gather the scattered twigs of
those thoughts, desires, and emotions that dissipate his energy and rob him of
dignity, courage, willpower, strength, and love. These qualities are virtues
and their opposites vices. We all have the capacity to cultivate virtue, to
replace vices with qualities that are genuinely needed to tread the path.
Every human being is endowed with strength that needs to be
understood and applied before he prepares himself for the voyage to the
unknown. Among all qualities fearlessness is the first and foremost. Purity of
heart is another quality. Consistency in pursuing the knowledge that helps the
aspirant in the inward journey is another virtue that needs to be cultivated.
These qualities lead the aspirant to generosity and the attainment of selfcontrol. They help him learn to give and to study his spiritual progress and
the teachings of the sages. The practice of austerity and straightforwardness is
also essential in preparing to tread the path.
The aspirant should cultivate and develop these qualities and learn to
express them in his daily life. Whatever good is practiced or attained should
be applied in one's daily life through both speech and action. The practice of
ahimsa (non-injury) helps one to express his love to his fellow beings and
fellow creatures. And the practice of non-lying with mind, action, and speech
leads one to realization of the Truth. When the aspirant gives up all selfish
desires, he finds that agitation and anger also disappear. Gladly and joyfully
offering the fruits of actions to others leads one to evenness. Those who are
not slanderous and have compassion for all beings, who do not usurp other's
wealth and property, who are gentle and abstain from harmful deeds, and
who are always steady are indeed on the path. Courageous, they always
forgive others, hate none, and are without pride and arrogance. These are the
qualities necessary to tread the path of spirituality. The students should
remember that on the path of spirituality these essentials are means to make
his journey easy and smooth.

4. Hypocrisy, pride, seeking of honor, anger, harshness, as well as

ignorance—these occur in one born to demonic wealth.
You are the architect of your own destiny. You are the composer of the
songs that you sing. You are the surveyor of all that you survey. You are the
redeemer of your life. Your destiny is created by you. A man who suffers as a
result of hypocrisy, pride, vanity, anger, and arrogance, and who shows off, is
an ignorant man. He constantly creates misery through his self-conceit. The
qualities he possesses are of a demonic nature and lead him to darkness.
Yoga therapy and training teach a definite and profound way to replace
demonic qualities with the spiritual qualities that are the necessary means to
pursue the path of knowledge. There is no such training program offered by
modern therapists and psychologists. Modern psychology does not focus on
the whole being or on helping one to set up a training program for selftransformation. Modern psychology is still learning to understand the cause
of suffering, whereas yoga psychology has discovered the means and
methods for self-transformation.

5. The divine wealth leads to freedom; the demonic way is known to lead
to bondage. Grieve not; you are born to divine wealth, O Pandava.
Cultivating good qualities gives one the essential means to follow the
path of knowledge, light, and spirituality. It is the means to attain freedom.
But those who are not awakened and are not aware of spirituality do not
cultivate the necessary means and qualities. They remain in bondage. Here
are two important points: The first is that good thoughts, good deeds, and
good actions are never lost. The aspirant who has trodden the path of
spirituality before is endowed with good qualities by birth. Such a student
finds the path easy. The second point is that the teacher should make his
students aware of their creative aspect and of the qualities that are healthy
and helpful in the path of self-unfoldment. Arjuna is made aware that he is
endowed with good qualities by birth.

6. There are two kinds of created beings in this world: the divine and the

demonic. The divine has been explained in detail. Now hear about the
demonic from Me, O Son of Pritha.
7. Demonic people know neither right conduct nor prohibition; in them
there is neither purity nor character nor truth.
8. They say that the world is untrue, without foundation, and Godless—
that it is produced only through sexual union and that it has no cause other
than what comes from passion.
9. Blocked by this vision, their true nature destroyed, those of little
intelligence, doing fearsome acts, come into power as malefactors for the
world.
10. Resorting to passion and desire, which is difficult to fulfill, possessed
of hypocrisy, seeking honor and frenzy, they of impure observances
operate, seizing upon false holdings, out of delusion.
11. They have recourse only to immeasurable worry that goes on until
dissolution. They are certain that the enjoyment of passions is supreme,
that it is everything.
12. Bound by a hundred snares of expectation, intent upon passion and
anger, they undertake the gathering of wealth by injustice for the purpose
of enjoying passions.
13. 'This I have received today, this wish of mine I shall gain later; this I
have, and this wealth shall yet be mine;
14. That enemy I have killed, others too I shall destroy; I am sovereign, I
am enjoyer, I am accomplished, strong, happy;
15. I am rich, I have influential relations. Who else is equal to me? I
shall perform sacrifices, I shall enjoy myself.' Thus deluded in ignorance,
16. Confused by the many divisions in their minds, covered by the net of
delusion, stuck in the enjoyment of passions, they fall into the impure and
lowly place.
17. Holding high opinion of themselves, lacking humility, possessed of
honor and frenzy due to wealth, they sacrifice by sacrifices in name alone,
in hypocrisy, and without regard to correct injunctions.
18. Resorting to ego, power, pride, passion, and anger, full of malice,
hating Me in the bodies of others and in their own,
19. These hateful, cruel, base humans in the world—the ugly ones—I
ever throw into demonic species alone.
20. Fallen into demonic species, stupefied in life after life, without ever
finding Me, O Son of Kunti, they then go to the lowest state.

Having explained the virtues that the aspirant should cultivate, Sri
Krishna now explains that there are two kinds of people in the world: those
who are endowed with good qualities and those who are endowed with bad
qualities. The latter are not aware of what is good and therefore do not know
how to perform good actions. They have no knowledge of either the path of
action or the path of renunciation. They cannot discriminate between right
and wrong. By habit they do harmful actions and suffer. They only work for
sensual enjoyments. They do not have any sense of purity. They delight in
lying and do not discriminate between a lie and the truth. Outwardly they
may appear to be holy, good, and kind, but within their hearts and minds they
are not.
Such people do not believe in God. They do not regard this world as an
orderly creation of the powers of the Lord. They think that there is no
primary cause behind this world. They think that the pleasures of the world
are everything and that the world has neither been created by nor supported
by God. Those ignorant people remain inflated and deluded, considering
themselves to be great enjoyers. They live according to a materialistic and
hedonistic view of the world: they consider the world to be full of objects of
enjoyment and think that they should take as much pleasure as they can. Such
people continually seek the objects of enjoyment.
Those deluded ones are always competing with others in their desires to
be stronger and to have more than others. They do not have enough
intelligence to acknowledge the existence of others and are overrun by
animosity and thoughts of destruction. Their minds remain busy in securing
arms and armaments to destroy others and to become victorious. They only
believe in increasing physical power and trust that physical might alone is
right. Engrossed in hypocrisy and arrogance, they are deluded by their evil
desires and thoughts. They are mean, selfish, vicious, and malicious. They
are always puffed up with pride, with the thought that they are great and that
society cannot survive without them. Such people are egotistical and think, "I
am the Lord of my life. I am great because I have immense wealth." They
perform sacrifices and give gifts with an egotistical attitude and then boast
about it. Their ideals are impure and false. They work hard to attain those
goals that lead them to ruin.
Having innumerable worries, they are never happy. Therefore they do
not have peace of mind. They believe that human life is a means for sensual
enjoyment, and that is the goal of their lives. But even if they have many

sensual enjoyments, they are never satisfied. They do not care whether they
obtain wealth by deceptive or dishonest means, for they have no sense of
justice. They have endless desires, and when they are not fulfilled, they
commit crimes in order to fulfill them. Deluded by such desires they remain
distracted and dissipated and suffer hellish lives both here and hereafter.
Conceited, arrogant, full of lust and anger, they disturb and destroy others.
They find pleasure in being violent. Full of desires they are always restless,
and they fight and kill one another.
The allurements of the external world are but temporary, transitory, and
momentary, so no one is ever satisfied with the pursuit of mundane pleasure.
Intrinsically the human being is in search of permanent happiness, peace, and
bliss. After examining all the objects of the external world, one finally
realizes that they offer only a fragment of happiness but are not able to
quench one's thirst. Real happiness lies within. But the majority of people are
not awakened to the reality that there are other dimensions of life that are
more glorious and enlightening. The aspirant should avoid the company of
such people, for their influence could be injurious.
These verses harshly condemn those who are caught up in materialism
and the pursuit of sensory pleasure. They provide a strong warning to the
student to avoid that way of being, to open his eyes to the dire consequences
of living that way. But all is not hopeless for those who are caught in the
snare of illusion. Though they must undergo many experiences and many
births and deaths to satisfy their cravings, they finally become disillusioned
with the mundane pleasures of the world, and they too slowly grow toward
the Light.

21. This is the threefold gate of hell that destroys one's self: passion,
anger, and greed. Therefore one should give up these three.
22. One freed from these three doors of darkness, O Son of Kunti,
conducts himself toward benefaction for himself and thereby reaches the
highest state.

This lifetime is just a small passage in the book of life, and it is an
essential preparation for the life that lies ahead. Those who cling to life here,
who are greedy and passionately desire the objects of sense enjoyment,
become angry when they are unsuccessful in obtaining those objects. Kama,
krodha, and lobha (selfish desire, anger, and greed) are three negative
emotions that lead the human being to unhappiness and misery here and to a
life hereafter that is of the same quality as his life in the body. Having all
sorts of objects of pleasure in this world, selfish and greedy people are still
unsatisfied. They do not enjoy the objects of pleasure they accumulate, for
they are continually afraid of losing what they already have and not gaining
what they want. Selfish desire, anger, and greed are harmful emotions that
need to be shunned.
Such ignorant people are invariably afraid of dying. They sometimes do
charitable things because they foolishly think that they will get returns after
death. That is not possible, for whatever we do here in this lifetime, we carry
the samskaras of our deeds with us. If one is miserable here, how can he
expect to be happy in the life hereafter? Unaware of the power of the soul and
lacking inner strength, one remains weak, feeble, deluded, and afraid of
death. Selfish desire, anger, and greed disrupt and destroy inner strength. The
aspirant should renounce these great obstacles. Selfish desire creates strong
bonds of passion, anger, and greed—the three openings to hell. Sri Krishna
says, “O Arjuna, one who is able to renounce these three harmful habits is
free from these dark openings.” If the aspirant genuinely renounces these
human weaknesses, he can attain the highest state.

23. One who, abandoning the injunctions of the scriptures, conducts
himself through actions based on desire does not attain fulfillment or
happiness or the highest state.
24. Therefore for you the scripture is the authority in order to determine
what ought to be done and what ought not to be done; knowing the act as
taught in the scriptural injunctions, you should perform your actions.

To achieve the goal of life, one should learn to follow in the footsteps of
the ancients whose experiences are recorded in the scriptures. The authentic
scriptures serve as authorities and guide the aspirant. One who does not
follow the teachings of the great sages but instead follows his own whims
does not attain happiness or the goal of life. The scriptures are the testimony
to guide the aspirant, enabling him to know what to do and what not to do.
Any experience during sadhana should be examined carefully; the validity of
the aspirant’s experiences during spiritual sadhana should be verified by
scriptural knowledge. Many have trodden the path of spirituality before us
and have left accurate records that help one to know if he is properly
progressing on the path. Many fake teachers perform so-called miracles that
are never referred to in the scriptures. They perform those tricks to acquire a
large following just to satisfy their egos. The seeker should be careful and
should not follow a modern teacher without knowing him well and
comparing his teachings with those of the authentic scriptures. The scriptures
guide the aspirant if they are properly understood and not interpreted merely
according to one’s own convenience.
Here ends the sixteenth chapter, in which the yoga of discrimination
between spirituality and ignorance is described.

Chapter Seventeen
Three Modes of Conviction

Arjuna asked
1. Those who sacrifice, endowed with faith but abandoning scriptural
injunctions, what is their status, O Krishna, is it sattva or rajas or tamas?

The Blessed Lord said
2. The faith of the bodybearers is of three kinds, born of their nature,
which is sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic; do hear thereof.
3. Everyone’s faith develops according to his mind’s essence, O
Descendant of Bharata. Thus, the person consists of faith. Whatever one’s
faith, that indeed is he.
4. The sattvic ones sacrifice to deities; the rajasic ones to demi-gods and
powerful semi-human beings (yakshas and rakshasas); others, the tamasic
ones, sacrifice to ghosts and to multitudes of other beings.

In this chapter Arjuna asks Sri Krishna to describe the various modes of
shraddha. The word shraddha means conviction. The devotee reveres the
objects of his devotion with full conviction and faith. Human beings can be
divided into three categories according to the predominance of sattva, rajas,
or tamas. Arjuna wants to know which quality is dominant in those who have
shraddha yet do not accept the teachings of the sages and the authority of the
scriptures. Sri Krishna replies that the tendency of one guna or another to be
predominant is a result of the samskaras that one carries from the past. In
spiritual people the sattva guna is predominant; those who are active are
motivated by rajas; and those who are inert, lazy, and dull are under the sway
of tamas.
The type of faith a human being has is in accordance with this natural
disposition. The aspirant who has the sattva quality predominant in his life
performs religious rites according to the teachings of the scriptures. One who
performs religious rites under the sway of rajas worships the gods with the
desire to fulfill his selfish ends. The tamasic person also has faith, but he
engages in superstitious worship. That class of people does not make efforts.
Those of a sattvic nature devote their time and energy to doing good, whereas
rajasic people remain active in fulfilling their desires, and those who are
tamasic do not do anything, for although they have expectations and desires
they remain dependent on others.

5. Those people who undertake terrible ascetic practices, which are not
enjoined by the scriptures, conjoined with hypocrisy and ego, possessed of
the power of attachment,
6. Those unwise ones, weakening the group of elements in the body, and
also Me, who dwells within the body—know them to be of demonic
determination.
Those who are influenced by tamas are full of sloth and inertia and
always depend on others whom they expect to fulfill their desires. When they
do engage in practices, those practices are distorted and reflect their obstinate

natures. They sometimes practice severe penances that are contrary to the
injunctions of the scriptures. For example, many such aspirants fast for
several days to remove their mental blocks. They think that fasting will purify
both their minds and bodies. They are obstinate and capriciously make up
their own way of sadhana and suffer as a result. They are neither self-reliant
nor do they rely on the teachings of the scriptures. They create suffering for
themselves and for others. Such aspirants do not improve and are not fit to
follow the path of spirituality.
Physical mortification and extremism, such as too much eating, sleeping
for long hours, and lying around engrossed in worries, is caused by tamas.
The aspirant should create a balance in his day-today life. When one learns to
observe his capacities and abilities, he does not go to extremes. But the
student who torments his body, mind, and soul is not suitable for the path of
spirituality.

7. The favorite food of everyone is also of three kinds; so also sacrifice,
ascetic endeavor, and charity. Listen to their distinctions.
8. Those that increase life-span, mental essence, strength, health,
comfort, and pleasantness, that are flavorful, unctuous, stable, and
satisfying to the heart are the foods that are favored by the sattvic.
9. Bitter, sour, salty, excessively hot, pungent, dry, and burning are the
foods favored by the rajasic, causing discomfort, depression, and illness.
10. Not fully cooked, flavorless, smelly, stale, leftover by others, not fit as
an offering is the food favored by the tamasic.
When one analyzes the behavior of aspirants, three distinct qualities are

noticeable in their actions, even when they offer gifts and charity. Those who
are sincerely generous and love others do charity without any expectation,
but those who perform actions selfishly and do charity with the expectation
of acquiring name and fame are rajasic and tamasic people.
We all know that food plays a great part in human life. The best selling
of all books are not bibles or other spiritual books but cookbooks. Our eating
habits in the modern world both in the East and in the West create disasters in
human life. The human being is obsessed with food, so much so that it seems
that one is born only for eating. Modern man eats many times a day without
knowing what comprises a nutritious diet. Taste has become predominant
instead of nutrition in the formation of our dietary habits. Artificial foods are
increasing daily. We have lost the sense of food value, and we eat foods that
are unhealthy.
Food that is not fresh or nutritious, that is leftover and full of spices or
grease is unhealthy. Overeating and eating unfresh food and food that is full
of fat and spices create many diseases. The mind and body are inseparable; if
proper food is not supplied to the body, the mind is affected. Such tamasic
food makes the mind dull, passive, and inert. On the other hand, rajasic food
agitates the mind and creates hypertension; it is also unhealthy for the liver
and hard on the kidneys. Rajasic food satisfies the senses, but it is not healthy
physically or mentally. It is not healthy for those who want to tread the path
of spirituality. Aspirants are advised that well-selected and well-prepared
vegetarian food is healthier than a meat diet. That food which does not cause
inertia and heaviness and does not make one restless, lazy, or sleepy is called
sattvic food. Those who eat sattvic food remain calm, quiet, and serene; those
who eat rajasic food become agitated, angry, and worried; those who eat
impure food and drink liquor are tamasic. Those who eat heavy food full of
fat and who drink alcohol excessively suffer both physically and mentally.
Food plays an important role in thought, speech, and action: it has
profound effects on all aspects of human behavior. Diet and environment are
two important factors that play a great role in sadhana. A calm, quiet, and
serene atmosphere and a simple, fresh, and nutritious diet are essential
requisites for the sadhaka.

11. That sacrifice performed according to scriptural injunctions by those
not desirous of fruit, harmonizing the mind with the thought, ‘one must
sacrifice,’ that is the sattvic sacrifice.
12. With the intention of fruit or even of hypocritical purpose, the
sacrifice that is performed thus, know it to be rajasic, O Best of the
Bharatas.
13. Against scriptural injunction, without distributing food, without
mantras, without priestly gifts, devoid of faith, such sacrifice is said to be
tamasic.
Sri Krishna explains that sacrifices performed in a serene way with
evenmindedness and without any expectation of reward are sattvic. When one
performs an action for the sake of others and dedicates the fruits to others
without any desire for rewards, that action is true worship. Sacrifice means
offering the best one has for the service of the Lord who dwells in everyone’s
heart. It is an offering to the Lord through action. Such an act performed
selflessly is of a sattvic nature, and the scriptures describe such acts as
supreme. By contrast, the sacrifices and actions that are performed with the
desire to obtain a reward are rajasic, and those that are performed out of
superstition and fear of spiritual injunction, without a sense of giving or any
consideration for others, are tamasic.
Many people in modern society have not developed an attitude of giving
to and doing for others in a sincere way. Such people are often seen in
psychotherapy. They are self-preoccupied and continually focus on their own
trials and tribulations, worries, disappointments, and expectations. Rather
than attempting to resolve their self-created conflicts one by one, if the
therapist instead directs such people to turn away from their selfpreoccupations and to develop a genuine concern for others, devoting their
thoughts and energy to helping others, many of their problems would quickly
dissolve and disappear. Such people have never been taught how to give, and

if they offer anything, it is not with a deep and sincere feeling of love but to
receive in return. Modern therapists would do well to actively guide the
thoughts and feelings of their clients toward giving to others rather than
passively listening to and reflecting on the drone of their clients’ selfpreoccupations week after week, year after year.

14. Service to the deities, the twice-born, the gurus, and the wise men;
purity, simplicity, celibacy, and non-violence are said to be physical
asceticism.
15. Speech that does not agitate, that is true, pleasant, and beneficial, as
well as the practice of self-study and japa is said to be the asceticism of
speech.
16. Clarity and pleasantness of mind, peacefulness, silence, total control
of one’s self, purification of sentiments—this is said to be mental
asceticism.
17. Those three kinds of asceticism undertaken by humans with supreme
faith when they are not desiring the fruit and are joined in yoga are said to
be the sattvic ones.
18. With the purpose of gaining respect, honor, and worship and out of
hypocrisy, the asceticism that is thus performed, temporary and unstable, is
rajasic.

19. The asceticism that is performed with stupefied comprehension and
with pain or for the purpose of uprooting others, that is said to be tamasic.
Sri Krishna describes three kinds of austerities. Austerity means
refraining from the sense pleasures and from habits that are harmful to
oneself and others. Austerities help the aspirant in preparing for spiritual
advancement, performing selfless actions, and worshipping the supreme
Lord. Although a preliminary step, austerity is nonetheless important in all
spiritual paths. The aspirant who has reverence for the yogis, learned people,
sages, and wise men; purity of mind and heart; straightforwardness; control
of mind. action, and speech; and who practices ahimsa is considered to be
austere.
The power of speech has a profound influence on the human mind and
heart. One who controls his speech, who does not talk ill of others but speaks
gently and never lies, his words are always beneficial and soothing to all. If
the aspirant learns not to lie, he speaks the truth. And that truth which is
greased with love is very helpful to others. Teaching and interpersonal
communication are carried on mainly through the medium of speech. The
way we use words makes a difference: if the aspirant learns to speak truth in
a gentle way, his speech will have an immense impact on the human mind
and soul. But when the aspirant speaks only to fulfill his selfish desires or
speaks that which is contrary to his thinking, he continually creates
psychological barriers for himself. The apta, the great man, speaks in accord
with the way he thinks and acts; there is complete coordination in his inward
action and speech. He never intends to hurt, harm, or injure anyone through
his speech.
Many people waste their time speaking nonsense, talking too much, and
gossiping for no useful reason. In the first stage of practice one should learn
to speak little, speaking only when it is necessary. In the second step he
should establish regular hours of complete silence every day, and in the third
step he should determine not to lie. Austere speech is a great virtue.
The practice of non-lying is important for many reasons. Those who
speak lies are afraid and lie because of fear of not being accepted. But the
power of speech is lost when one lies, and there is always a conflict in the
mind, for one knows that he is lying, yet he continues to lie. Such people can
never be known by others; they never prove to be good friends. They become
victims of their habits, and then they lose the power of discrimination.

The student should learn the distinction between external and internal
austerities. In physical or external austerities one should learn not to do that
which is not to be done and to speak the way he thinks, understands, and
knows. Mental austerity is also very important. When one practices mental
austerity, he maintains serenity and silence and remains vigilant toward his
thinking process. He avoids entertaining those thoughts that are disturbing
and dissipating. Both mental and physical austerities purify the aspirant and
make him fit to follow the path of spirituality. These are called sattvic
austerities. When the student purifies his mind, action, and speech with the
help of sattvic strength, he attains the higher realms of life.
There is another category of aspirants—those who are rajasic. They also
practice austerities but with the desire to be respected and to obtain honors
from others. They want others to revere and follow them; their austerities are
engrossed with self-interest. Many athletes, dancers, and musicians practice
austerities to gain name and fame. They are also motivated by rajas.
Another group of aspirants is tamasic. Their thoughts, actions, and
speech are directed toward hurting and injuring others. They are never
concerned for others but only do things to fulfill their selfish ends, regardless
of how much harm is done to others in the process. These people lie, connive,
and use others for their own convenience. They are very obstinate and
egotistical, and they torture themselves and others in order to attain their
selfish ends.
Austerities are not introduced in the modern educational system. That is
one of the reasons modern man becomes selfish and has no consideration for
his fellow human beings. The kind of austerities that are introduced to
children in religious schools are worse than none at all, for they create guilt,
which haunts the child’s inner being until the last breath of life. That system
of introducing austerity is based on fear, and the religion that teaches fear can
never help one on the path to liberation. Religious schools suffer as a result of
that serious error. They create guilt by introducing many “don’ts” without
explaining their purpose or helping children appreciate the profound positive
effects that self-restraint can have on the mind and body. Those who
seriously pursue athletics, music, and other endeavors learn to practice
austerities by sacrificing pleasures for their single goal. But such austerities
are rajasic in nature. Sattvic austerity is seldom taught in modern life.

20. ‘One ought to give’—the charity that is given thus to someone
incapable of returning the favor, that is given at the right place and time
toward someone worthy—that charity is remembered as sattvic.
21. That which is given with the purpose of gaining a return or aiming at
a fruit or given with distress—that charity is remembered as rajasic.
22. That which is given at an inappropriate place or time to those
unworthy, without respect and insultingly—that charity is said to be
tamasic.
These three verses explain the purpose of charity and why one should be
charitable. When is charity useful and necessary in human life? For one who
has attained knowledge, doing charitable work and giving gifts to others
becomes habitual. It is a superb taste that one acquires after understanding
that giving is one of the most profound ways to attain liberation. No human
being can remain without doing actions, and every action produces fruits. If
the fruits are not given to others, their binding force compels one to do more
actions. Thus the doer becomes lost in the jungle of action. One should learn
to do his actions and give away the fruits to others. The aspirant who is aware
that charity or giving gifts to those in need is a part of spirituality is called a
sattvika.
Those who give gifts and do charity with the expectation that it will be
returned by Providence are selfish people. They give with the idea of getting
something in return and of having others praise them. Sometimes they do
charity to maintain their social status, but they never give selflessly. Such
people are rajasic. The gifts that are given in a tamasic state of mind are the
lowest form of gifts. Tamasic people give out of compulsion and without joy
in giving. They always want to receive gifts from others. These unfortunate
people have never learned and enjoyed the law of giving. Demanding and

expecting to receive from others becomes their nature. They have no sense of
when, how, and where to give.

23. OM Tat Sat, ‘OM, that is Reality’—this is the threefold statement
concerning Brahman; from this the Brahmanas, the Vedas, and the
sacrifices were produced in the ancient past.
24. Therefore all the sacrifices, charities, and ascetic acts of those
proficient in the knowledge of Brahman, performed according to the
ordinance, are commenced daily after enunciating ‘OM’ thus.
25. After enunciating Tat, ‘that,’ without the intention of fruit, the
sacrificial and ascetic acts, and the various acts of charity are performed by
those desiring liberation.
26. The word Sat, ‘Reality,’ is used to express Reality as well as
goodness. Also the word ‘Sat’ is used to express a praiseworthy act, O Son
of Pritha.
27. Stability in sacrifice, asceticism, and charity is also called Sat; also
any act for the purpose of these is called Sat alone.
When the aspirant understands the importance of sattvic austerities
practiced with mind, action, and speech, and then learns to dedicate the fruits
of his actions in order to attain liberation, he is the highest aspirant on the
path of yoga. His mind, action, and speech are directed to the supreme Lord
alone. Verses 23 to 27 describe the way in which yogis and sages constantly
remain conscious of the supreme Lord. Whenever they perform any duties or
actions, worship, or give gifts, they remember three words: OM Tat Sat.

These three words have deep meaning.
OM is the cosmic sound remembered by yogis during meditation. It is
considered to be a living force that represents the supreme Lord. There are
four states that can be realized by human beings. The first three—waking,
dreaming, and sleeping—are experienced by all human beings and creatures.
But the fourth state is attained only by the fortunate few accomplished yogis.
It is a silent state, the deepest and most profound state of perfect equilibrium.
The sound OM expresses the knowledge of these four states of
consciousness. The aspirant learns to utter this sound all the time, before he
talks to anyone and before he begins any work.
Good action is also called Tat Sat. It is auspicious for the sadhaka to
remember the words Tat Sat, for they remind him of the goal of his life. The
word Tat means that which exists in itself without the help of any other, and
Sat means the absolute reality other than which nothing exists. The words Tat
and Sat remind the aspirant of the self-existent glory of the Lord and of his
benevolent kindness and goodness. Thus OM Tat Sat refers to all that exists
by itself without any second. These words are used by devotees, sages, and
yogis for the supreme Lord.

28. An offering made, charity given, ascetic observance undertaken, or
whatever act performed without faith, is called asat (untrue, unreal, evil); it
bears nothing, neither here nor after death, O Son of Pritha.
Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that the actions performed by yogis are selfless,
done with absolute non-attachment and dedication to the Lord. They do these
actions with perfect love and devotion as worship. The duties and actions that
are performed with divine love and devotion are called Sat. But there are
those who perform their actions, do charity, give gifts, practice austerities,
and perform religious ceremonies without divine love and devotion. The
scriptures refer to these actions as asat. Such acts are neither healthy nor
helpful and do not bear good fruits, for they are done selfishly. Selfish people
are not happy in this world, and they remain unhappy in the life hereafter.
They create misery, unhappiness, confusion, and delusion.

Here ends the seventeenth chapter in which love and devotion for the
divine is contrasted with lust for the objects of the world.

Chapter Eighteen
The Wisdom of Renunciation and
Liberation

Arjuna said
1. O Mighty-armed One, I wish to know the essence of renun ciation and
of relinquishing the fruits, O Lord of senses, destroyer of sin.

The Blessed Lord said
2. The wise have known that abandoning the desire-fulfilling
observances is renunciation; the insightful ones say that relin quishing the
fruits of all actions is relinquishing.
The actions that are helpful and liberating in the path of spirituality have
been described. Now Arjuna wants to better understand the profound
teachings of the path of renunciation (sannyasa) and of the path of
renouncing the fruits of one’s actions (tyaga). Aspirants who renounce the
desire for pleasure are called sannyasins, and those who perform their duties
skillfully and selflessly, giving up the fruits of their actions are called karma
yogis. Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that there are characteristic differences

between renunciates and those who perform actions but renounce the fruits.
However, from time immemorial there have been two paths: the path of
renunciation and the path of action. The majority of people in the world
follow the path of action. Only the rare and fortunate few walk the path of
renunciation. Only those who have already burned their desires for selfenjoyment can walk that path. Others should not try. For the ordinary human
being, the path of action is the way.
When one studies various commentaries on the Bhagavad Gita, he finds
an intellectual tug-of-war between two groups of commentators: one pulling
toward renunciation and the other toward action. These two paths are distinct
and separate, and there is no need to judge one as being better than the other.
Those who do are prejudiced and act under the influence of their egos. When
one studies the message of the Bhagavad Gita, he realizes that all knowledge
originates from one source and finally leads one to that source. That source is
pure Atman, from which springs the entire knowledge and toward which it
flows through various avenues until it finally meets its source: the ocean of
happiness, bliss, and peace.
The Bhagavad Gita’s message ends in this eighteenth chapter, which is
conclusive and decisive. When he replies to Arjuna’s questions, Sri Krishna
answers the questions of all aspirants. Which is the path that leads one to the
immutable, unchangeable, everlasting bliss? Which is the path that should be
followed? What is renunciation, and what is action? Many commentators
have drawn certain conclusions because they themselves lust for the
enjoyments of the world and because they think that since the majority of
people of the world follow the path of action, it is superior to the path of
renunciation. But to know Truth, one does not need the support of an army of
people. Truth can and should be attained in all possible ways. To attain the
absolute truth, there are various paths that lead to the same summit. It is of no
use to create a war of arguments, attempting to prove one path superior or
inferior to another.
In the ancient tradition, the organization of one’s life was guided by the
thought that one would live for at least one hundred years. The first twentyfive years were devoted to school and learning. In the next twenty-five one
attempted to understand relationships and interaction with others and the
creatures of the world. The third quarter of one’s life was dedicated to
understanding the values of life with its currents and cross currents. The last
twenty-five were devoted to spiritual sadhana alone. One would completely

wash off the past; he would renounce and become totally non-attached,
dedicating himself to the supreme Self alone. These last twenty-five years
were devoted to Self-realization. With that systematic way of living, one
finally attained the purpose of life. That was considered to be the normal
procedure. But even during ancient times a few enlightened ones joined
monasteries from a very early age, renounced the normal course of life, and
attained Self-realization.
The path of renunciation is meant for only a few, and those who are not
prepared should not tread that path. Those who learn to dedicate the fruits of
all actions to the Lord and for the well-being of others are on the path. Those
who renounce both actions and their fruits also follow the path to Selfrealization. In the path of renunciation all action is renounced. Therefore the
desire to receive the fruits of action is renounced as well. But in the path of
action, action is not renounced; only the fruits are surrendered.
The question might arise: Is it possible for anyone to renounce all
actions? This can be answered with another question: When all the actions,
desires, and motivations for self-enjoyment are renounced, what is the action
to be done and what is the purpose of doing actions? There remains only one
action: doing action for the welfare of others. That action which is not done
for one’s own pleasure but only for the well-being of others does not have the
power of bondage. Therefore such action is allowed to be done in the path of
renunciation.
Those who follow the path of action believe that actions such as yajna,
charity, and austerities are liberating actions that should be performed. And in
the path of renunciation, actions such as meditation, contemplation, and
prayer are done with the motivation of attaining liberation. Although it is
important and a must in the path of renunciation, liberation is only a step
toward Self-realization. Even after one has liberated himself from the
bondage of attachment, he has yet to attain unity with the Self of all.
Liberating the individual self from the bondage of attachment is not the same
as attaining samadhi or Self-realization. Even if one performs actions that are
liberating and that do not create further bondage, he still remains an
individual and has yet to reach a higher state. He has to learn to expand
consciousness and go on expanding it until he realizes universal
consciousness.
The goal of the renunciate is to systematically fathom one after another
of the various stages of consciousness that lead to the innermost One. The

following principles are the basis of the path of renunciation: (1) The
renunciate directs all his energy toward the attainment of the goal of life,
Self-realization; (2) He does not waste time and energy pursuing desires
based on self-interest; (3) The renunciate’s journey is inward; it is neither
action nor inaction nor retreat. It consists of performing actions mentally and
directing the mind and its modifications inward rather than toward the
external world; (4) Non-attachment is attained spontaneously because the
renunciate is not involved with objects; they have all been consciously
renounced; (5) With pure reason all the samskaras are burned in the fire of
knowledge; (6) There remains only one desire: the desire for Self-realization.
That desire does not motivate one to do actions in the external world but
becomes a means to build determination, will power, and one-pointedness.
Therefore such desire is an essential means rather than an obstacle in the path
of sadhana; (7) In the path of renunciation, Self-realization alone is the goal,
and any action that does not become a means is firmly rejected and
renounced. There is no half-here and half-there; total dedication and devotion
are essential limbs for renunciation. This path of the rare few is the highest of
all. It is difficult but not impossible. Those who are fully prepared should
walk this path of fire and light. They should not listen to the suggestions of
those who are not capable of following the path of renunciation.
Those who are not prepared to become renunciates should not think that
they cannot realize the Self. That which is important to understand and attain
is the state of non-attachment, without which treading either path—
renunciation or action—is meaningless. It is important to do actions and
duties for the common good and to release oneself from the helpless and
inevitable law of karma. Such actions become a means to Self-realization,
provided the goal always remains foremost and one’s actions are performed
with zeal to offer all the fruits to the Lord. That brings freedom from the law
of karma. Dedicating all the fruits of action to the Lord is meditation in
action, a central theme of the Bhagavad Gita, inspiring Arjuna and all
aspirants. In the path of action, Self-realization is said to be attained by
performing actions that are not binding, that are performed for the Lord
alone. No path is superior or inferior. That which is important is to attain the
wisdom of non-attachment.

3. Some contemplative thinkers say that action should be abandoned like
a fault; others say that sacrifice, charity, and ascetic actions cannot be
relinquished.
4. In this regard hear my determination concerning relinquishment, O
the Best of Bharatas. O Tiger among Men, relinquishment indeed is said to
be of three kinds.
5. Sacrifice, charity, and asceticism—these acts should not be
abandoned; indeed they must be done. Sacrifice, charity, and asceticism are
purifiers of the contemplative and the wise.
6. Even these acts, however, should be performed after abandoning
fruits. O Son of Pritha, this is my definite view.
Some learned men say that all actions should be given up because
actions lead one to an endless chain of reactions, thus creating a whirlpool for
the performer of the actions. Once one is caught in that whirlpool, it is
difficult to come out of it. There is another group of learned people who
believe that good actions should not be abandoned because they need not
create bondage. According to them, there are two kinds of works: one leads
to bondage and the other does not. Describing both renunciation and action,
Sri Krishna advises Arjuna to perform actions without any attachment in
order to establish righteousness. He says that the three practices of yajna,
charity, and austerity are righteous actions. Those actions performed with
non-attachment and without the desire to enjoy the fruits should be practiced
by those who cannot follow the path of renunciation.

7. It is not appropriate to renounce the eternal act; to abandon that out
of delusion is said to be tamasic.
8. If one abandons an act because ‘it is difficult’ and out of a fear of
discomfort to the body, upon committing such rajasic abandonment one
would not gain the result of abandoning.
9. The act that is ever performed because ‘it ought to be done,’ O Arjuna,
giving up attachment as well as the fruit—such relinquishment is
considered sattvic.
Sri Krishna tells Arjuna that one should not renounce his duty under the
influence of either rajas or tamas. Those who renounce their duties under the
spell of confusion, delusion, or disappointment cannot tread the path of
renunciation but descend to the darkness of ignorance. Giving up one’s duty
in a fit of emotion is tamasic renunciation, which inevitably creates misery.
Those who renounce based on such motivation become a burden to
themselves, to their nation, and to the whole of mankind. They remain
dependent on others for their livelihood and become poor examples to others.
Sattvikas alone are capable of treading the rare path of renunciation. Rajasic
and tamasic people should first learn to practice sattva. They should do their
duties and should never out of disappointment or in a fit of emotion or
excitement think of treading the path of light.
Those who are under the sway of rajas are afraid of afflictions, and their
thoughts of losing and not gaining cause them serious pain. It is fear that
causes them to give up actions. They search for pleasure by making efforts
only to attain their selfish ends. If one renounces the world because of fear or
pain, he gives a bad name to the path of fire and knowledge. Tamasic people
are known for their inertia and sloth; their inactivity creates misery for
themselves and others. They are not fit for either the path of renunciation or
the path of action. They believe in “eat, drink, and be merry” and remain

unconscious of both the internal and external realities. For escape they use all
sorts of intoxicants. The sattvic aspirants never renounce their essential
duties, whether they follow the path of renunciation or the path of action.
They work hard, perform their duties skillfully, and even learn to suffer to
make others happy. Sattvikas are the rare people who are successful and
always have clarity of mind; rajasikas are confused; and tamasikas are
ignorant.

10. A relinquisher possessed of mental essence, endowed with intuitive
wisdom, with his doubts dispelled, neither hates the unhappy deed nor is
drawn to the happy act.
11. It is not at all possible for a bodybearer to abandon acts in their
entirety; he, however, who relinquishes the fruits of action is said to be the
relinquisher.
12. The fruit of action is threefold: undesirable, desirable, and mixed;
such fruit accrues after death to those who do not relinquish; but to the
renunciates, there is none.
Those aspirants who are endowed with the qualities of sattva, who are
free from all doubts, do not withdraw themselves from disagreeable work and
do not become attached to pleasant work. For them duty is duty, and they
perform their duties with an even mind. It is not possible for the ordinary
human being to abstain from his duties, for he carries his samskaras from his
previous lives. He has those latent tendencies within himself that create his
duties, and sooner or later they have to be performed. There is no choice but
to perform one’s duty, but one can choose to renounce the fruits of his
actions. The aspirants who do not relinquish the fruits of their actions receive
those fruits, but they are uncertain as to what they will be. Some fruits are
agreeable, some are unpleasant, and some are mixed. Those who perform

their actions selflessly and skillfully, dedicating all the fruits of their actions,
remain unaffected here and hereafter.

13. Learn these five causes from Me, O Mighty-armed One, taught in
Samkhya where all actions end, for the fulfillment of all actions.
14. The substratum, the agent of action, and instrumentality of different
kinds, separate motions of various kinds, and the rulership of the deities as
the fifth—
15. The actions that a human initiates with the body, speech, and mind,
whether just or its opposite, these five are its causes.
According to Samkhya philosophy and science, when an aspirant
performs action from a state of equilibrium, it is accomplished without any
obstacle. Samkhya explains that five factors are necessary for accomplishing
an action. First the doer of actions needs a field for his actions and a dwelling
place, called adhisthana. The second important factor is the performer of the
actions who dwells within the field. He should be skilled in the performance.
The third factor is the means and instruments of various kinds that are used
by the performer. To attain the desired fruit, it is necessary to have health and
appropriate means. The fourth factor is effort, for if a concentrated effort is
not made, the desire to accomplish something is wasted. The undertaking
should be well planned, and effort should be applied skillfully. The fifth
factor is a favorable circumstance. Good actions performed in past lives give
one the opportunity to be reborn in a family, environment, and country that
offer favorable circumstances.
Some people think that a favorable circumstance is the result of luck.
But luck is not a non-human factor; it is not partiality shown toward any one
particular individual by a supreme being. A favorable circumstance is selfcreated. The Bhagavad Gita gives this as the last factor. Human endeavor,
sincerity, and effort are the principle virtues, and favorable circumstances

follow accordingly. Luck is the joy obtained after one’s task has been
performed successfully, with skill and selflessness. Luck is within the domain
of the individual and not in the hands of Providence. Those who are not
aware of the actions they have done in the past to bring about their present
good circumstances call it luck and attribute it to chance or to Providence.

16. This being the reality, he who sees only the self as the agent, because
he has not cultivated his wisdom, such a dull-wit does not see.
17. He who does not have the sentiment produced by the thought ‘I,’
whose intelligence is not defiled, even upon killing these beings, he neither
kills nor is bound.
Samkhya philosophy and science declares that five factors are important
for accomplishing an act: place, agent, means, effort, and circumstance.
Those who do not understand this truth are inflated with pride; they think that
they are the doers. Such people are ignorant and unwise. False pride feeds the
ego, which creates the last obstruction in the path of Self-realization. In fact
all the negative emotions feed the ego, creating a serious barrier that
separates a person from the whole.
The aspirant who does not have a feeling of egoism, who has completely
surrendered himself, his deeds, and the fruits of his actions to his single goal,
the supreme Lord, is not considered to be an evil doer even if he kills
someone in the battlefield, because he has profound knowledge of life, love,
and equality, and his actions are completely dedicated to the Lord. He is free
from the I-ness of his ego and is a representative of the Lord. He has no
intention to injure, hurt, harm, or kill anyone. While protecting the
boundaries of their country, soldiers fight for their national cause and kill
intruders, yet they are not considered to be killers and murderers. When one
who is selfless kills someone while performing his duty, his mind remains
unstained, and he is not bound by the law of karma, for he has gone beyond
the bonds of individuality and remains one with the Lord.
Of course this should not promote fanaticism. Those who are narrow-

minded sometimes become religious fanatics and think that they can misuse
this scriptural injunction for their own selfish convenience. The yogi who
practices ahimsa with mind, action, and speech never dreams of killing
anyone. The question here is whether Arjuna should retire or fight the battle
of life. When Arjuna, a hero and leader of a nation, becomes despondent and
shrinks from his duty in the battlefield, Sri Krishna teaches him not to resign
but to fight, for it is the battle of life in which all human beings are
participants. All aspirants are fighters. To attain the highest goal one needs
courage, strength, and zeal to fight. That is the true meaning of these verses.

18. Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower—this is the
threefold source of impelling the action. The instrument, the act, and the
agent—this is the threefold gathering of action.
19. The knowledge, action, and doer are said to be of three types through
the distinction of gunas, as it is taught in the way of discriminating gunas
correctly. Hear of these also.
To live in the world these three are needed: the object of knowledge, the
knower, and the instrument. Actions cannot be performed without these three
essentials; one must have profound knowledge of them for the
accomplishment of any work. Each of these is again divided according to the
gunas.

20. That whereby one sees a single, immutable aspect in all beings,
undivided in the divided, know that to be the sattvic knowledge.
21. When one knows the knowledge and all the separate kinds of aspects,
each divided separately among all beings, know that to be the rajasic
knowledge.
22. That which is attached to a single effect as though it were the entire,
without proper reasoning, devoid of essential meaning and reality, and
narrow in scope is said to be tamasic.
Knowledge is of a threefold nature. Aspirants who have cultivated sattva
know that the Self is not subject to change, death, or decomposition. Such
aspirants have gone beyond the limitations of ignorance and have acquired
the knowledge of the whole. Because they have profound knowledge of the
whole, they do not suffer from limited and divided vision. For them death and
birth are not occasions for either sadness or joy, pleasure or pain.
The knowledge that prompts one to see the single whole as many has a
rajasic quality. There is another kind of knowledge, tamasic, that does not
even recognize multiplicity. It only sees and reacts to what is immediately
beneficial. Those possessed of this form of knowledge do not think of the
consequences of their actions. They are engrossed in sensual pleasures and
act impulsively. Such people treat a part as the whole. Selfishness blinds their
vision, and they remain in the darkness of ignorance.

23. An act performed devoid of attachment and without attraction and
aversion, by one desiring no fruit, is called sattvic.
24. That act, however, which is performed by one desirous of fruit and
possessed with ego with much exertion of many kinds, that is called rajasic.

25. Without foreseeing the result, loss, violence, or capacity, the act that
is initiated out of delusion is called tamasic.
All actions are divided into three classes. Sattvic actions are those that
are performed selflessly, the fruits being dedicated and offered to the Lord.
All yoga practices, including physical exercise, pranayama, and meditation,
are considered to be sattvic actions. Prayers, chanting, and charity done
selflessly are sattvic in nature.
Actions that are not performed with non-attachment but with desire for
self-gratification are rajasic. Such actions are performed with great strain and
are enveloped by selfish and egotistical desires. That way of being leads one
to be chronically anxious and tense. The majority of people in modern society
suffer under the strain of actions motivated by rajas. If modern therapy were
to concentrate on helping one develop a sattvic way of being, many of the
physical disorders and much of the psychological stress that we see would be
eliminated.
Tamasic actions are those undertaken without regard for the
consequences. The tamasic person stumbles along, reacting to the moment
without regard to the havoc he creates as a result of his capacities or
limitations. He may think that he is capable of much more than he really is
and thus injures himself and others. Or he may believe that he is incapable,
and thus become inert and fail to act. Although such people are
unpredictable, one can accurately predict that the results of their actions will
be disastrous.

26. Liberated from attachment, not uttering ‘I’, endowed with the power
to sustain and enthuse, unaffected in fulfillment or failure, such an actor is
said to be sattvic.
27. Attached, desirous of the fruit of action, greedy, inclined to violence,

impure, possessed by exhilaration and depression, such an actor is said to
be rajasic.
28. Not joined in yoga, unrefined, unbending, a rogue, harming others,
lazy, always depressed, a procrastinator, such an actor is said to be tamasic.
One who is endowed with the sattvic quality is free from attachment and
egoism. He is courageous and enthusiastic. With evenmindedness he
functions and does his duty. He maintains equilibrium all the time; he is
neither inflated by success nor depressed by failure. A man of equilibrium is
an example for society, for society needs something more concrete than the
teachings of the scriptures. Such people are great assets. By contrast, people
who are endowed with a rajasic nature are active and work selfishly for sense
gratification. They are greedy people and are harmful to society, for they
believe in possessing and hoarding. They readily experience fluctuations of
joy and sorrow in their daily lives; they have no control of the mind and
senses. Their desires are selfish; such people do everything for the sake of
selfish ends. Those who are tamasic do not have any concern for the
existence of others. They are inactive, lazy, and hurt and harm others. To
obtain sensual joy, they will commit any heinous crime. They are the worst
examples in society.
After describing three kinds of performers of actions, Sri Krishna
distinguishes between three types of intelligence (buddhi) and three types of
resolution or firmness (dhriti). Among the four main instruments of
antahkarana, buddhi is the discriminative, judging, and deciding faculty
through which the light of knowledge comes forward. It is through buddhi
that one discriminates and understands, judges, and makes decisions before
he performs actions. There are three kinds of buddhi. The buddhi that helps
one to discriminate, judge, and decide; to know right from wrong; and to
understand what is to be feared and what is not to be feared is called sattvic
buddhi. Sattvic buddhi leads the aspirant inward and helps him to fathom the
subtler and higher realms of life. Without any distraction, the pure reason of
buddhi becomes penetrative and fathoms those levels of life that normally
remain unknown to ordinary human beings.
The higher or sattvic buddhi has the following characteristics. (1) The
power of discrimination is developed; (2) The buddhi that has learned to
discriminate between the Self and non-Self, between the supreme Self in its
unmanifest state and its power of manifestation, possesses the power of non-

attachment; (3) Such a buddhi has one-pointedness and inwardness; (4) It has
attained calmness, quietness, and steadiness; it remains serene, undisturbed,
and undissipated; (5) It is free from the desire for sense gratification; (6) It
helps one to decide right from wrong and to act in a timely manner; (7) It
makes one selfless and giving, without any expectations; (8) It helps one to
remain tranquil and even in all conditions; (9) It helps one to remain a
witness; (10) It leads one to spiritual heights.

29. Now hear the threefold division of intelligence and sustenance by
their gunas, being taught in entirety and separately, O Arjuna.
30. Ordinance and prohibition, what ought to be done or not to be done,
dangerous and nondangerous, bondage and liberation—the intelligence
that knows these, O Son of Pritha, is the sattvic one.
31. That by which one knows incorrectly virtue and vice, what ought to
be done or ought not to be done, O Son of Pritha, is rajasic.
32. That intelligence, which, covered by darkness, believes vice to be
virtue, and all the matters opposite of their reality, O Son of Pritha, is
tamasic.
The buddhi that is of a rajasic quality is incapable of helping one
distinguish that which is the righteous path from that which is not. It is unable
to discriminate between the real and the unreal. However, the rajasic buddhi
is important for gaining external knowledge. Mechanical and scientific
knowledge, knowledge of business, and knowledge relating to any aspect of
the external world is a result of rajasic buddhi. It is not possible for anyone to
function in the external world without it. People of a tamasic nature are
ignorant and remain engrossed in sense enjoyment. They act in a manner

opposite and contrary to the sattvic quality. Tamasic knowledge leads one to
sullenness, sloth, and inertia.
The aspirant should not forget that the three gunas always function
together in human life. The difference between one person and another is in
the relative strength of each quality. The most important factor is which
quality is predominant. If sattva is predominant, life becomes peaceful,
joyful, and delightful. If rajas is predominant, one becomes active and hyper,
prone to restlessness, and may suffer from psychosomatic and psychological
illnesses. If tamas is predominant, everything in life becomes negative and
passive. Then one does not experience any happiness or joy. The
predominance of one or another of these three qualities is clearly noticed in
human behavior. Those who have gone beyond the three gunas, who have
realized the Self, and who remain in a state of samadhi are rarely seen. They
do exist in our world, but they are one in a hundred million. Those great ones
guide humanity in a subtle and profound way, emanating their love and
knowledge through their minds, actions, and speech.

33. That undeviating steadfastness (dhriti) which sustains activities of
mind, prana, and senses through yoga, is, O Pritha, a sattvic one.
34. That by which one sustains virtue, desire, and worldly success,
desiring fruits incidentally in the context, that steadfastness (dhriti) is
rajasic.
35. That by which someone devoid of intuitive wisdom does not give up
sleep, fear, grief, and depression, that steadfastness (dhriti), O Son of
Pritha, is tamasic.
In addition to intelligence and knowledge, dhriti (firmness or steadiness)
is necessary in the path to infinity. There are aspirants who have knowledge,
who know what to do and what not to do, but who lack the inner strength to

be steady and firm in doing their practices. Some aspirants are very steady
and firm but do not have profound knowledge of spirituality. In the path to
Self-realization, sattvic buddhi and sattvic firmness are equally important.
The way it is used here, the word dhriti has a meaning more profound than
that which is usually attributed to it. It is that inner strength which does not
dawn all of a sudden but which is attained only after long spiritual practice
under the guidance of an accomplished yogi. Human effort, sincerity, and
honesty lead the aspirant to attain that power. For lack of that power, the yogi
cannot reach the highest realm of spiritual knowledge.
Dhriti enables one to have a one-pointed mind, and it helps one maintain
coordination between the mind and the vital breath and pranic energy. It is a
method of applying sushumna, which is important for attaining spiritual
knowledge and a state of tranquility, for all inner and external distractions are
controlled by sushumna application. Those who systematically learn the
method of meditation know that after attaining physical stillness and
steadiness, irregularity of the breath continues to disturb the mind. Mental
unrest can also disrupt the breath. Breath and mind are two inseparable
friends who work together until the last breath of life. An in-depth study of
the breath has not yet been undertaken by modern scientists, but the yogis
know the subtle function of the breath and are aware that irregular breathing
agitates the mind and vice versa. When the breath is calm and serene, when it
has no jerks and no long pauses, it does not distract the mind but creates
feelings of intense joy and steadiness.
The state in which both mind and breath function in a balanced way is
established by dhriti. Dhriti is that which brings mind and breath to a state of
balance; it is the power that helps them to work together in a serene way. If
one is not able to regulate his mind and breath in a perfectly coordinated way,
his meditation will not bear the desired fruit, samadhi, no matter how many
hours he practices meditation.
When one’s posture is comfortable, still, and steady and when the mind
is focused on the bridge between the nostrils, then sushumna is applied. Prior
to the application of sushumna, the practice of even breathing, alternate
nostril breathing, and inner and outer retention of the breath should be
perfected. These exercises should be practiced only under the guidance of a
yogi, not just with instructions from books and manuals.
Firmness or determination is of three kinds: sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic.
It is sattvic when it is able to direct the power of mind, senses, and breath to

bring about balance, and when the mind and breath mutually help one another
in a coordinated way. It is sattvic when used for spiritual attainment and
selfless actions. When used for selfish desire and self-enjoyment, it is rajasic.
Rajas-endowed dhriti prompts one to perform actions or religious acts with a
desire to enjoy the fruits of those actions. Tamasic dhriti produces excessive
and long hours of sleep with numerous and disturbing dreams. It also creates
fears, makes one timid and sorrowful, and leads one to cry without valid
reason. It makes one arrogant and self-conceited. The firmness of tamasic
people is expressed in obstinacy and conceit.
Psychotherapists encounter tamasic dhriti in the passive-aggressive
personality, in clients who show willful resistance and negativity, and in
those who tenaciously hold on to their symptomatic behaviors despite their
superficial pleas that their therapists rid them of such behaviors. If the
therapist can help such clients to use that firmness in the context of rajas and
sattva, that force which is being used in a negative way can serve a positive
and useful function. It is not to be eliminated but rather to be redirected so
that it becomes an instrument to help one achieve positive goals.

36. Now hear from Me the three kinds of happiness in which one
delights through practice and definitely finds the end of sorrow.
37. That which initially is like poison but is in effect like elixir, that
happiness is called sattvic born of the pleasantness of one’s intelligence.
38. That which appears initially like elixir through the union of senses
and their objects, but in effect is like a poison, that happiness is considered
rajasic.
39. That happiness which both initially and in the end result deludes
one’s self, arising from sleep, laziness, and inattention, that is said to be the

tamasic.
These verses describe three kinds of joy. When first encountered the
highest joy seems like a poison or at least a bitter medicine to those who are
used to the gross worldly pleasure. But when one becomes familiar with its
subtle qualities, that joy becomes a nectar, a joy so subtle that it cannot even
be imagined by one who has tasted only worldly pleasures. It is said “A bitter
pill has a blessed effect,” and such is the case with sattvic joy.
What is joy? That which makes one happy, that which is not disturbing
or painful is joy. The whole of mankind and all creatures of this universe are
searching for perennial joy. They seem to find a bit of it in relating to
different objects of the world, but alas those joys soon diminish for two
reasons: the object of joy changes, and the enjoyer’s concept of joy also
changes. Nothing is permanent in the mundane and temporal world.
Creatures other than human beings are controlled by nature, but human
beings have a will of their own and a power unique in itself that helps them to
continue in search of the imperishable, unfettered joy. When one becomes
tired of the fleeting joys of the mundane world, he looks and searches within,
in his inner world which he has never tried to know and understand. In the
inner world there is a fountain that ultimately quenches the thirst of those
seekers who genuinely search for it. If the seeker gets the opportunity and
learns the way of fathoming all the levels of life, he will find that there is a
source and that there are profound ways to go to that source, from which
flows perennially the joy divine.
Discontent is seen on the face of everyone. No one seems to be happy
and joyous, even if they have all the desired objects of the world. But the day
comes when one awakens to the reality that searching in the external world is
in vain, that only the search within is rewarding and satisfying. Then one
begins following the path of the inward journey. The Bhagavad Gita says that
when the individual self finds delight and joy in the Self, that is the highest of
all joys. It is called love without an object, meditation without form, love
without desire, and meditation without an obstacle. That is sattva-endowed
joy. Such joy is born only after the serenity of Self-knowledge is attained. All
the pleasure experienced by the senses is but momentary, and it is also the
source of pain. But the profound joy that is attained by Self-realization is
permanent and everlasting, for the Self knows no pain, no misery, and no
worry.

The joy experienced by rajas-endowed people arises from the contact of
the senses with the objects of the world. It is relished like nectar in the
beginning, but it is like poison in the end. Tamasic pleasure deludes the
human mind in both the beginning and the end. It springs from the ignorance
of sleep, laziness, and negligence.

40. There is no essence in the earth, in heaven, or even among gods that
may be free of these nature-born gunas.
All that exists on this earth, in the sky, and in the heavens is enveloped
by the three gunas. These three qualities stage a drama for mankind, and all
kinds of people participate in that drama. Some are called sattvic, some
rajasic, and some tamasic. Everyone plays his role according to his nature.

41. The actions of the brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras, O
Scorcher of Enemies, are properly divided by the gunas born of the
primordial nature Prakriti.
42. Peace, control, asceticism, purity, forgiveness, simplicity, knowledge,
realization, and positive belief are the actions of a brahmana produced by
nature.
43. Bravery, confidence, steadfastness, dexterity, not escaping a battle,
charity, and expressing sovereign power are the actions of a kshatriya, born
of nature.
44. Farming, husbandry, and trading are the actions of a vaishya, born

of nature, and the actions of a shudra, consisting of service, are also born
of nature.
Sri Krishna describes four kinds of people according to their innate
qualities and dispositions. Birth does not take place by chance; it is not
accidental. Our desires and actions from the past lead us to our
circumstances, abilities, and desires in this birth, and that which we desire
and do now determines our future. We experience desires, and we also act
according to the qualities or samskaras that we carry from our past. We carry
our samskaras from here to the hereafter and are reborn according to our own
choices. As we have already noted, human beings can be broadly divided into
four categories according to their inherent qualities and dispositions. In the
Bhagavad Gita they are called brahmana, kshatriya, vaishya, and shudra.
The brahmana quality is found in spiritually inclined people who know
that the purpose of life is to attain tranquility. These aspirants practice selfrestraint and self-control, and they gain knowledge of both the internal and
external worlds. They also have a profound knowledge of life here and
hereafter. They are endowed with the sattva quality because they have
strengthened that quality in the past. These brahmanas are called brahmanas
not because they have inherited wisdom from their ancestors but because they
cultivated that disposition with sincere efforts in their past lives. Sattva is not
received through inheritance, but it is the result of one’s own efforts. Many
times we find that a vagabond or ill-mannered and irresponsible person is
born into a family of brahmanas, and often a man of brahmanic qualities and
disposition is born into a shudra family. It is said that everyone is like a
shudra by birth, but one becomes a brahmana only by his own efforts. It is
one’s samskaras that create his disposition. One who has the qualities of a
brahmana is led toward a virtuous and spiritual way of life, and he is able to
teach the art and science of life.
Rajasic qualities are seen in the personalities of kshatriyas. They have
valor, courage, and the ability to administer and rule. The rajasic quality and
disposition leads one toward an active and creative way of life. The vaishyas
are another class of people; they are less endowed with sattvic and rajasic
qualities than the people in the first two categories. They like to trade and
conduct business. Shudra is the category of people who are not fit enough to
tread the path of spirituality. They do not have zeal to be active, they lack
courage, and they are not fit for trade and business. Their duty is that of

service.
In ancient times this division into classes was the basis for the
distribution of labor. It was designed for the well-being of society. One’s
position and work was determined according to the qualities he possessed.
Over time, however, this concept of categorizing individuals according to
their abilities has become distorted and used to separate people based on their
caste, color, race, culture, or religion. That creates both psychological
divisiveness and conflicts in the individual, community, and nation, and it
devalues human life. Many great cultures have suffered as a result of false
standards fostered by the priesthood and so-called religious leaders who have
used religion and scripture to feed their own egocentric and selfish
philosophies. These people are supposed to be the custodians of culture and
religion, but they become caught up in the cult that serves their selfishness
instead of propagating the fundamentals of truth. Instead of teaching unity,
they teach diversity. Many societal diseases such as disparity, illiteracy,
malnutrition, and discrimination between the poor and rich, the
knowledgeable and innocent, have degraded the human being so much that
we have forgotten the truth that all human beings breathe the same air
supplied by one and the same Lord.
No human being has a right to despise and look down on others and
make others suffer. And any nation that desires to advance and march
forward should first abolish such rules, ideas, customs, and systems that are
the main barriers to the integration of the nation. The sense of inferiority and
superiority and the resulting complexes are created by human society and not
by God. Everyone should have the opportunity to rise, to think freely, and to
contribute what he can for the well-being of society. Society generally
considers those who performed services to be the lower class, but the
Bhagavad Gita teaches that service is the highest of all actions, for it leads to
liberation. Those who serve society in a way that others cannot should be
adored and respected. There is nothing good or bad as far as work is
concerned. Why should one think a leader is higher than a barber or garbage
collector? Such erroneous ideas cause suffering to both the individual and to
the whole of society.
The Bhagavad Gita integrates different elements of society into one,
without which the survival of a society is ultimately at stake. The grouping of
people described in the Bhagavad Gita is not meant to create disparity, caste,
or rigid categories based on birth in a particular family. That would be

opposed to the central theme of this sacred text.

45. A person attains perfection when absorbed and delighting in his own
act. Hear how one who is content in his own actions finds perfection:
46. Worshipping Him with his act, he from Whom begins all activity of
beings, by Whom all this is spanned and pervaded, a child of Manu finds
perfection.
Verses 45 and 46 are conclusive as far as the caste system is concerned.
These verses say that anyone who is sincerely devoted to his own duty is
successful. Not only brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras, but
anyone who is devoted to his duty can attain perfection. The aspirant attains
success when he regards his duty as worship to the supreme Brahman from
whom all human beings spring and by whose power they are able to do their
work. One who surrenders himself with mind, action, and speech and makes
Brahman the goal of his worship reaches Brahman. The student should
remember that self-surrender—when one learns to surrender all that he thinks
is his own—is the highest of yogas.
Total surrender means total acceptance of the supreme Self in the place
of the individual self. This should not be misunderstood and thus lead one to
become inert and lazy but should instead lead one to do all that can be done
for the Lord. The attitude, “I am Thine and Thou art mine” is the first step in
the practice of self-surrender. The second step is “Thou art everything,” and
the last step is “All that is conceivable and comprehended, all that exists is
Thou alone.” That state of Self-realization is attained by very few, only by
those who have completely surrendered their egos and have realized the
beauty and grandeur of the Lord of life. That realization is beyond I-ness and
my-ness. It is timeless and infinite.

47. Better one’s own duty (dharma) even devoid of quality, rather than
another’s duty, even though well performed. By performing the act
determined by nature, one does not gather stain.
48. One should not give up one’s inborn act even though faulty; all
endeavors are accompanied by some fault, like fire covered with smoke.
49. One whose intellect is not attached, whose inner instrument is
conquered in every way, one whose attraction is gone, attains through
renunciation the perfection of actionlessness.
Sri Krishna explains that one should always try to understand his own
character, abilities, and capacities and that all duties should be undertaken
according to one’s own character. One should not abandon his own duty and
attempt to do the duty of others. No matter how beneficial it might seem,
abandoning one’s own duty is unhealthy.
If one abandons his duties and takes up the duty of another, there will be
serious disorder in society. Good and bad are two values that we project onto
circumstances according to our own viewpoints. Though one’s natural duty
may appear to be tainted with faults, one should realize that all actions are
tainted with defects. As fire, which is lustrous, contains smoke, likewise no
action is perfect in itself. One who is completely non-attached and continues
to do his duty as best he can, renouncing the fruits of his actions, is a true
renunciate. He attains the highest of perfection.
Every action in the phenomenal world is defective. No matter how good
one’s intentions, no action is perfect. If one gives something to another
person with love and kindness, that action will produce pain if the object
given is lost or broken or if another person becomes envious. If one wants to
practice non-injury and therefore avoids eating meat, he nevertheless must
kill plants and other forms of life in order to survive. If Arjuna fights in the
battle of Kurukshetra and becomes victorious, he will help his nation
overcome evil, but in the process he will create immense suffering. One must

be courageous and act to the best of his knowledge and ability in spite of the
inevitable imperfections of his actions, and he should remain non-attached to
the fruits.

50. How one, having attained perfection, attains Brahman, learn from
Me—as well as the final determination of knowledge.
51. Endowed with purified intelligence, controlling himself with
sustenance (dhriti), abandoning the objects of senses such as sound, and
casting away attraction and aversion;
52. Enjoying solitary places, eating lightly, with speech, body, and mind
controlled, unceasingly intent on the yoga of meditation, having perfect
recourse to dispassion;
53. Having abandoned ego, pride, passion, and anger, not receiving
sense inputs, free of ‘mine,’ the pacified one is fit to become Brahman.
54. Having become Brahman, with pleasant and clear self, one neither
grieves nor desires; alike toward all beings he gains the highest devotion
toward Me.
55. Through devotion he recognizes Me, how expansive and who I am in

reality. Then knowing Me in reality, he enters Me immediately.
56. Even performing all the actions at all times depending entirely on
Me, through My grace he attains the eternal, imperishable state.
Sri Krishna briefly explains how the accomplished yogi attains the
highest Brahman. The yogi has to attain many realms of wisdom before he
can attain the highest Brahman. In the first step he learns to develop control
over his senses through self-restraint. In the second step he concentrates the
mind, not allowing it to become distracted and dissipated. Next he makes his
mind one-pointed by practicing both meditation and non-attachment. In the
next step he becomes a witness and does not identify himself with the objects
of the world. In a still higher stage he establishes himself in his true nature:
peace, happiness, and bliss. At the final state he realizes his Self as the Self of
all. Each of the stages of wisdom is valuable and is an accomplishment, but
the highest of perfection is attained when the individual soul is united with
the absolute Self. The yogi who has attained that does not suffer as a result of
the negative emotions that have such a powerful impact on the minds and
hearts of ordinary people. The realized yogi is tranquil, for he has already
attained Brahman, and for him there is nothing more to be attained. He has no
desires; his whole life is devoted to the Lord alone. He has profound
knowledge through direct experience of the greatness of the Lord, and he
remains one with the Lord. Such a yogi performs his actions with an attitude
of worship. His whole life is devoted to the Lord, and the eternal becomes his
permanent abode.

57. Renouncing all acts to Me with the mind intent upon Me, resorting to
the yoga of wisdom, always hold your mind in Me.
58. Holding your mind in Me, you will go across difficult passages
through My grace; if, however, out of ego you will not listen, you will
perish completely.
These two verses give instructions to Arjuna, who follows the path of

action, not of renunciation. One who follows the path of action should
dedicate his thoughts, actions, and speech to the Lord. If one keeps his mind
fixed on the Lord, it enables him to give up and offer the fruits of his actions.
The aspirant who attains that crosses the mire of delusion through the grace
of God. When human endeavor and efforts have been exhausted, then dawns
the grace of the descending force of the compassionate Lord of life. But if the
aspirant does not follow this path and instead is caught by his egoism, the
purpose of his life is not achieved.

59. If, resorting to ego, you think, ‘I shall not fight,’ this, your resolve, is
a false one; nature will impel you.
60. Bound by your nature-born act, O Son of Kunti, what you do not
wish to do out of confusion, even that you will do helplessly.
If one becomes obstinate and thinks that he will not do something that
he has to do, he can waste time and he can suffer, but his nature will
eventually force him to do it. Although he is a warrior and a leader and a
descendant of Bharata, Arjuna withdraws himself from the field of action and
wants to retreat. Because he is confused and deluded, he forgets to do his
duty and becomes caught up in attachment. But Sri Krishna tells him, “You
must perform your duty. You have to do your dharma, and for performing
your duty you must be non-attached, free from pride, prejudice, and the
bonds of ego.”
The aspirant should always remember and follow his inborn nature and
potential, with the help of which he should learn to unfold, improve, and
accomplish the purpose of life. Often occasions come that lead one to deviate
from the path, but then he should again make sincere attempts to tread his
path. Every human being is endowed and gifted with some great and
profound quality that can be called his inborn nature. If the aspirant does
something that he is not meant to do, his inborn nature will compel him to do
that for which he is meant. Suppose the aspirant follows the path of
renunciation sincerely with his mind and heart but becomes distracted along

the way. He will invariably come back again to the path because his deepseated desire to follow the path of renunciation, motivated by his inborn
qualities, will again bring him back to his path.

61. The sovereign God dwells in the heart space of all beings, O Arjuna,
making all beings move with His maya as though they were mounted on a
machine.
62. Go and take refuge only in Him with your entire being, O
Descendant of Bharata. By His grace you will attain the highest peace and
eternal station.
63. I have taught you this knowledge, more secret than any secret. After
contemplating it in entirety, do as you wish.
In Verse 61 there is a subtle and profound teaching. Sri Krishna says, “O
Arjuna, the supreme Lord is the inner dweller in everyone’s heart.” That the
Lord is the inner dweller should be understood by all aspirants, but with that
knowledge alone, one cannot directly attain wisdom. He will have to learn to
practice to see and realize the Lord himself first; then he can grasp and
comprehend that the Lord dwells in every heart. The mere knowing of a
principle is not the same as realizing it.
Those who do not realize that the Lord dwells in the hearts of all remain
attached to the vehicles of nature. They are compelled as though they are
being used as puppets. Therefore Sri Krishna says, “O Arjuna, surrender
yourself to the Lord alone, and once you have surrendered, then by grace you
can attain the state of tranquility and thus will be liberated.” That is the secret
of secrets that is imparted to Arjuna. After that secret is imparted, one is left
alone to decide for himself what is right for him. When a teacher imparts
knowledge, he wants his student to use his free will, to be courageous, and to
make experiments to experience and then to realize what is right for him.

Spiritual teachings should not be forced on students as commandments. But
there is a commitment between the teacher and the student, and once the
teacher has completed his commitment, it is up to the student to choose,
practice, and do as he likes. Thus in the path of spiritual knowledge, fifty
percent of the responsibility lies with the teacher and fifty percent with the
student.

64. Again hear My final words, the most secret of all: you are firmly My
favorite; therefore I shall say what is beneficial to you.
65. Let your mind be in Me; My devotee, sacrificing to Me, offer
salutations to Me; you will come only to Me truly; I avow you are My
beloved.
66. A bandoning all virtue, come and take refuge in Me alone; I shall
liberate you from all evil; grieve not.
The teacher’s love for his student is immense and immeasurable. It is
always selfless and of the highest quality. Such love cannot be found in any
other relationship in the world. With his immortal love for Arjuna, Sri
Krishna says, “Listen to my words of wisdom. I am imparting the secret of
secrets because you are my beloved disciple. This is for your good.”
Students are many, but disciples are rare. A student can join a school
and can also leave it. He comes to a spiritual teacher, studies with him for
some time, and then leaves forever. But when the spiritual commitment is
made by both the teacher and disciple, it is impossible for the teacher not to
impart to his disciple all the secrets that he himself has realized. The true
disciple always remains eager to learn the subtle secrets that fulfill the
purpose of his spiritual commitment.
When the disciple learns to fix his mind on the Lord alone and dedicates
his entire life to the Lord, he attains the kingdom of eternity, where the Lord

resides unattached in His splendid glory. Knowledge of the path of devotion
and of the way in which God is attained is a secret imparted only to the very
dear disciple. Sri Krishna says, “O Arjuna, forsake all religious works
whatsoever and make the supreme Lord your final and sole refuge. Grieve
not, for you will be free and released from all sins.” The 66th verse contains
the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita in a nutshell: renounce all actions and
come to the Lord alone, for your stains will be washed by the Lord.
Ordinarily if one abandons his duties, he suffers and plunges into sorrow. But
if one renounces a lesser duty in order to perform a greater duty, his sin is
forgiven. If the cause is higher and more profound than the duty that is
abandoned, that duty should be renounced delightfully. Suppose one
renounces his home, he will suffer the consequences of renouncing his duties,
but he will be free from that suffering if he takes on a duty greater than the
duties he was performing before. If one renounces his country for the service
of mankind, he is performing a higher duty. And if one renounces everything
and devotes all his time and energy to deep and profound meditation and
contemplation, he is the highest of all devotees, and his stains are washed off
by his pure devotion.
Serious questions arise here: Since Arjuna was prepared to renounce the
world in the beginning, why was he not allowed to do so? And why is the
secret of secrets, that one should abandon all duties and that the Lord will
wash away all his stains and sins, being imparted here? In the beginning
Arjuna wanted to withdraw himself and to abandon his duty in a state of
confusion and despondency. He was not renouncing in a state of wisdom but
in a deep state of sorrow and out of fear, attachment, and confusion. These
verses teach the aspirant that the highest of all is that path in which one
devotes and dedicates all that he has and all that he is to the Lord. Such a lost
lover of the Lord is the highest of all aspirants. Whether he follows the path
of renunciation or the path of action, he is liberated here and now, and he
enjoys eternal happiness.

67. This should never be taught by you to a non-ascetic or a nondevotee
nor to someone inattentive nor to one who defames Me.
68. He who narrates this supreme secret to My devotees, completing his
highest devotion toward Me, will come to Me alone, without doubt.
69. Among human beings, there is no one who causes Me greater
pleasure nor shall there be anyone more beloved of Me on earth than
70. One who will read this virtuous dialogue that has occurred between
us. Let him sacrifice unto Me with the sacrificial observance of knowledge;
this is My view.
71. Endowed with faith and without calumny, whichever human would
hear this, even he, liberated, would obtain the beautiful worlds of those
with meritorious acts.
The great sages like to impart their knowledge to their loving disciples.
Their teachings are called secret knowledge because they cannot be
comprehended by the ordinary mind. The teacher imparts such knowledge to
his close disciples only. It would be a waste of time and energy to impart
such knowledge to those who are not prepared, for it would be like Greek or
Latin to them. There is no reason to discuss the spiritual depths with those
who are not at all proficient in the path of spirituality. The supreme secrets of
spiritual knowledge are imparted only to the dear and true devotees who have
already trodden the path and who have still to attain.
One who imparts the knowledge of devotion and dedication to those
weary, tired, and old travelers who are on the path but still stumbling is dear
to the Lord. Such teachings help both the teacher and the student. The

greatest of all professions is the teaching profession, and among all the
branches of knowledge, spiritual teaching is the highest. Among the many
spiritual paths, the path of complete devotion and dedication is the highest.
Thus the teacher who imparts his spiritual knowledge is the highest of all
teachers. Teaching spirituality is the highest of actions and is pleasing to the
Lord of life. There is no one higher than the sage who propagates the truth
lovingly and selflessly.
One who studies, practices, and propagates the dialogue between Sri
Krishna and Arjuna with all his heart and mind is the greatest of all devotees.
By studying and practicing the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita, one is in fact
worshipping the supreme Lord. One who listens to the discourse of the
Bhagavad Gita with unquestioned faith is a holy man. Such a man becomes
free from stains and fears. One who contemplates upon the teachings
imparted through the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna is released
from bondage and attains a high state of spirituality. Among all the offerings
made by human beings, the sacrifice that is made by imparting the knowledge
of the Bhagavad Gita is the highest of all. The knowledge imparted by the
Bhagavad Gita is beneficial for all people in all times.

72. Did you perchance hear this, O Son of Pritha, with a one-pointed
mind? Did your delusion of ignorance perchance vanish, O Arjuna?

Arjuna said
73. The delusion has vanished by Your grace; I have received
remembrance, O Infallible One. I stand here free of doubts; I shall act
according to your word.
Throughout the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, it has been
Arjuna who has asked the questions. But here Sri Krishna asks questions of
Arjuna: “Is your delusion dispelled? Has your ignorance vanished? As a

result of knowledge imparted by me, are all your questions answered, or is
there still doubt lingering in your mind?” Arjuna replies, “O Enlightened
One, my ignorance has been dispelled, and my doubts have been resolved by
the teachings you have imparted to me. I have no doubt in my mind and no
conflict about doing my du $$$es. I will fight with all my might. You have
inspired me, and I have regained my inner strength. I will perform my duties
according to my dharma. Now I am able to perform them skillfully and
selflessly without any attachment.”
Those like Arjuna who plunge into sorrow and delusion lose their
memories of their true nature and of the source from which they came. But
Sri Krishna has led Arjuna to the awareness of that which he had forgotten.
Arjuna now realizes his unity with the Self of all.

Sanjaya said
74. I heard this wondrous dialogue, making my hair stand on end,
between the indwelling One and the great-souled Son of Pritha.
75. By the grace of Vyasa I heard this secretmost, supreme yoga from
Krishna, the Lord of yoga, personally teaching it Himself.
76. O King, remembering again and again this wondrous, virtuous
dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, I rejoice again and again.

77. And remembering that very wondrous form of the Lord, there is great
amazement in me, O Lord, and I rejoice again and again.
78. Where there is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and where there is the
bowbearer, Son of Pritha, there glory, victory, success, and polity are
definite. This I believe.
Sanjaya, the narrator of the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna,
speaks to King Dhritarashtra. The compiler of this dialogue is the sage Vyasa
who gave the power of vision to Sanjaya, enabling him to narrate what occurs
on the battlefield. Sanjaya says, “O Dhritarashtra, I have heard the supreme
and profound wisdom and the knowledge of life and the universe and that
which is beyond from the master of yoga. I am describing it to you exactly as
I heard it. When I recall these profound teachings my hair still stands on end.
With great joy I saw the vision of the Lord of the universe, and the joyous
and delightful memory of that experience is still with me. I firmly assert that
where there is a great hero like Arjuna and a perfect yogi like Sri Krishna
helping him, that side is sure to be forever victorious in all ways.”
The dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna gives deep insight into the
philosophy of life and its practical application. These teachings describe the
eternal wisdom of the infinite Lord and the ways in which that wisdom can
be attained. When a good student has a perfect preceptor, attainment is sure.
Here ends the profound and unique teachings of the Bhagavad Gita.
In this concluding chapter Yogeshvar Krishna imparts the art and
science of renunciation.

Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
Words set in SMALL CAPS are defined elsewhere in the Glossary.

ABHYASA. Practice. The Bhagavad Gita suggests two means to attain mastery
over the mind and its modifications: abhyasa, which is a systematic spiritual
practice or instruction given by a master, and VAIRAGYA, which means
detachment.
ACHARYA. A spiritual teacher or instructor. Literally, one whose character
and behavior should be followed by others.
ADHIBHUTA. That which is related or belongs to the elements or which resides
in the elements.
ADHIDAIVATA. That which is related or belongs to the bright beings (gods) or
resides in the gods.
ADHISTHANA. Base, foundation, or seat. In the Bhagavad Gita, the senses,
mind, and buddhi are said to be the seat of attachment and anger through
which the ever-shining light of ATMAN is covered, just as the fetus is covered
with the membrane of the amniotic sac and fire is covered with smoke.
ADHIYAJNA. That which resides in sacrifice. SRI KRISHNA says, “I, the
supreme Lord, am the indweller or presiding God of all rituals.”
ADHYATMA. That which is related to, belongs to, or resides in ATMAN.
ADVAITA. Non-dual; single reality. In the VEDANTA system, the Self or the
absolute Reality is said to be the non-dual, single principle.
AGATASU. A living being; one whose life force has not departed or been
disconnected from the body. According to the Bhagavad Gita, the soul never
dies and is never born; death is a habit of the body. As long as there is breath,
a person is called alive, but the moment the breath ceases, one is declared to
be dead. See GATASU.
AGNL. Fire.
AGRA BHAGE. In the front. In this context it refers to the base of the juncture
that separates the two nostrils. See NASAGRE.

AHIMSA. Non-injury, non-hurting, and non-killing. It is one of the YAMAS,
also known as the “great DHARMA,” the highest of all observances leading to
spiritual goals.
AJAPA JAPA. Repetition of the MANTRA done spontaneously throughout the day
and night without any effort. The state of ajapa japa comes when a student
has practiced his or her MANTRA for a long period of time, uninterruptedly and
sincerely. Then, as a result, the unconscious mind is filled with the vibration
of the MANTRA.
AJNA CHAKRA. That center of consciousness located between the eyebrows;
literally, “command center.” At this center the command of spiritual guidance
from the higher CHAKRAS is received. It is the seat of the mind.
AKSHARA. Indestructible. According to the Bhagavad Gita, absolute Reality,
Consciousness, or the pure Self is indestructible. It also means a unit of
speech.
AMRITA. Ambrosia, nectar. According to legend, the gods and demons
churned the ocean, and as a result found nectar. The gods, however, knew the
art of drinking the nectar and thus became immortal, while the demons
remained subject to death and rebirth.
ANASAKTI YOGA. The spiritual path that emphasizes performing one’s actions
without becoming attached to their fruits. It is an alternative path for those
who do not choose to follow the path of renunciation.
ANANYA BHAVA. One-pointed devotion; literally, the attitude of “I am not
different” from the object of devotion.
ANITYA. Non-eternal. Except ATMAN, the pure Consciousness, all that which
seems to exist is non-eternal, illusory, and impermanent. See NITYA.
ANTAHKARANA. The inner instrument. The intellect (BUDDHI), ego (ahamkara),
sensory-motor mind (MANAS), and storehouse of memories (chitta) are
considered to be the inner instruments of cognition.
ANTAHKARANA CHATUSHTAYA. The group of four functions of the inner
instrument: intellect, ego, sensory-motor mind, and the storehouse of
memories.
ANTAR YAJNA. Inner sacrifice or inner ritual. It signifies the knowledge
through which a yogi burns all past SAMSKARAS and VASANAS and attains
freedom from them forever.
ANTAR YOGA. Internal yoga characterized by meditation, as opposed to
external rituals and physical yoga postures.
APANA. A kind of vital force (PRANA) ordinarily identified with exhalation.

See PRANA.
APTA. A trustworthy person, a great person, one who speaks in accord with
the way he thinks and acts, one whose speech and actions convey truth.
ARDHA PADMASANA. The half-lotus posture, used for meditation.
ARJUNA. The protagonist of the Bhagavad Gita, who chose SRI KRISHNA as
his charioteer in the war against the KAURAVAS. Arjuna represents the
individual self or the student, and KRISHNA is the universal Self or teacher.
Arjuna means “one who makes sincere efforts.” Historically, Arjuna belongs
to the famous royal clan BHARATA, after which the subcontinent India (called
BHARATA in Hindi) is named.
ARYA. Fully civilized.
ASANA. Posture. This is the third rung of RAJA YOGA, consisting of HATHA
YOGA postures or asanas. This term refers especially to the one seated pose
used for meditation.
ASAT. That which is non-existent. See SAT.
ASHRAM. A community of spiritual aspirants where discipline, practice, and
study are pursued. It also denotes the place where such a community resides.
ASHRAMA. The stages of life. In the Indian tradition the life span is ideally
divided into four parts. The first is called BRAHMACHARYA, which covers the
first twenty-five years of life and is devoted to study, self-discipline, and selftransformation. The next twenty-five years, grihastha, the householder’s life,
is spent in skillfully and selflessly carrying on one’s duties toward family and
society. The third stage, vanaprastha, retirement, consists of preparation for
renouncing the world and cultivating the courage to attain the goal of life. In
the fourth and last stage, SANNYASA, one develops a completely detached
attitude and establishes himself in the knowledge of the pure Self, leaving the
external world behind.
ASHTANGA YOGA. The eight-limbed yoga described by PATANJALL, also called
RAJA YOGA.
ASHVATTHA. A tree that, because of its immensity and roots that grow
downward from branches above, is compared with the imperishable Reality,
and vice versa. (See Bhagavad Gita XV. 1-2).
ASU. PRANA, the life force.
ATMA YOGA. The yoga of ATMAN; a spiritual path that leads the aspirant to the
realization of ATMAN.
ATMAN. The pure Self. According to Indian philosophy, the Self is eternal,
and its essential nature is existence, consciousness, and bliss. It permeates the

waking, dreaming, and deep sleep states and remains above all mundane
pains and pleasures.
AUM. The phonetic spelling of OM, indicating the three sounds A, U, M,
which designate the three states of waking, dreaming, and sleeping.
AVATARA. A divine incarnation. After death, realized beings can choose to
incarnate onto the physical plane in order to serve humanity. Ordinary
mortals are merely reborn to continue their growth process and do not have
the choice of remaining beyond.
AVATI ITI OM. An etymological meaning of OM: “One who protects is called
OM.”
AVYAKATA. Unmanifest, the unmanifest primordial nature. Under the
guidance and direction of the supreme Lord, this unmanifest primordial
nature produces the entire universe. See VYAKTA.
BANDHAS. Locks. The various locks practiced by yogis, such as the root lock,
navel lock, and tongue lock, are engaged in order to hold and channel energy
and thereby enhance spiritual practice.
BHAGAVAN. The glorious one. The supreme Lord is called Bhagavan because
He is the One whose glory is this entire Universe. He is the almighty creator,
preserver, and annihilator.
BHAKTI YOGA. The yoga of love and devotion.
BHARATA. Lover of knowledge. It also refers to the ancient wise King
Bharata and his descendants. Since ARJUNA is a lover of knowledge as well as
a descendant of King Bharata, this epithet is also given to him. It also refers
to the nation of India.
BHAVA. Mood, emotion, positive feeling, mental creation. In order to
cultivate bhava, the Bhagavad Gita advises the aspirant to change his mental
state from its ordinary course and channel it to awareness of the Self, ATMAN.
BHUTA. The elements, the past tense, departed souls, or individuals who are
born. According to the Bhagavad Gita, something cannot come out of
nothing, and that which exists cannot be made to be non-existent. It is a
misconception to think that a soul comes into existence at birth and then
becomes non-existent after death. The soul remains unaffected while the
body, breath, and mind go through birth and death.
BHUTI. Victory, happiness, and strength.
BRAHMA. Creator of the universe. In Sanskrit the term “Brahma” refers to the
immanent aspect, while the term “BRAHMAN” refers to the absolute
transcendent Reality. Another similar term, BRAHMANA, refers to those who

are knowers of BRAHMAN or sometimes (but never in the Bhagavad Gita) to
the BRAHMANA caste, the intellectual class of Hindu society.
BRAHMACHARI. One who walks or lives in BRAHMAN consciousness. In usual
usage it also means one who is in the celibate student phase of life and one
who does not indulge in sensual pleasures.
BRAHMACHARYA. The first phase of life, from birth to twenty-five years. The
focus of this phase is study, self-discipline, and self-transformation. See
ASHRAMA.
BRAHMAN. The absolute Reality, pure Consciousness. According to ADVAITA
VEDANTA philosophy, Brahman is the Absolute non-dual Reality, and Its
essential nature is existence, consciousness, and bliss. There is a perfect
identity between the Self and Brahman; the difference or duality between
Brahman and the Self is mere illusion.
BRAHMANA. The knower of BRAHMAN. Brahmana is a specific title given to
one who has attained the profound knowledge of Atman and who experiences
the unity between his self and the Self of all. It also refers to members of the
priestly class, who are scholarly and SATTVIC in nature. The anglicized
version of the word is “Brahmin.”
BRAHMA NIRVANA. Absorption in BRAHMAN.
BRAHMA RANDHRA. The divine hollow. In yogic literature it refers to the
gateway leading to the highest of all centers of consciousness.
BRAHMA SUTRA. The first codified philosophical work on VEDANTA, by
Badarayana. Many scholars have written commentaries on this work. Among
them, that of SANKARA is the foremost and most profound.
BRAHMA VIDYA. The science of BRAHMAN, the absolute Reality, which
includes philosophical and practical disciplines that lead one to the spiritual
goal.
BRAHMA YAJNA. A sacrifice performed for attaining BRAHMAN. It is purely
internal and does not require any external rituals.
BUDDHI. Intellect, the decisive faculty of the inner instrument. This is the first
evolute of PRAKRITI. closest to PURUSHA.
BUDDHI YOGA. The yoga of intellect. It is almost the same as JNANA YOGA.
CHAKRA. Wheel or circle. In the yogic tradition, it refers to a center of
consciousness. There are said to be seven or more of these located within the
human being, ranging from the base of the spine to the top of the head.
CHATURBHUJA. With four hands. In his anthropomorphic form, Lord VISHNU,
preserver of the universe, is described as having four arms. Thus the epithet

“four-armed” is given to him.
DEVAS. Bright beings or celestial beings. According to the Bhagavad Gita,
any kind of activity, whether physical, verbal, or mental, if endowed with a
sattvic quality, belongs to the realm of the devas. Devas are said to be
superior to other beings because of the predominance of sattva in them.
DHARMA. The eternal law that holds and maintains the individual as well as
social life. In the Eastern tradition, it signifies philosophy, spirituality, and
discipline, which if practiced could guide humanity toward its highest
destiny. It also refers to one’s duty or destiny in life.
DHRITARASHTRA. The blind king, father of DURYODHANA. leader of the
KAURAVAS.
DHRITI. The quality of resolution or firmness. It is one of the essentials on the
path of spirituality, ensuring the sincere aspirant’s success in attaining the
highest goal.
DHUMA. Smoke. It symbolizes the dark aspect of the human personality or the
dark forces that try to hide the light of Truth.
DHYANA YOGA. The systematic practice of meditation; one of the paths
described in the Bhagavad Gita.
DIVYA CHAKSHU. Divine vision. In the yogic tradition, it is said that a person
with a divine eye can see the phenomena of past, present, and future.
DURYODHANA. The unjust king who dishonestly usurped the kingdom of the
PANDAVAS, thus creating the situation that caused the great war of the
MAHABHARATA.
DVESHA. Aversion. According to the Bhagavad Gita, in order to attain peace
and happiness, one needs to eliminate RAGA (attachment) and dvesha
(aversion). As a result, control and mastery over the senses as well as
transparency of mind or real happiness ensue.
EKOHAM BAHU SYAM. A famous statement from the Upanishads meaning, “I
am One; let me become many.” This indicates that the divine will or divine
determination is the cause of the manifestation of the universe.
ESHANAS. Desires. Out of the numberless desires, there are three main ones.
First, the desire for a spouse and children; second, the desire for wealth, and
third, the desire for name and fame. The SANNYASIN must renounce these.
GANAPATI. The deity of Indian mythology who has the head of an elephant
and the body of a human being. The popular name of this god is Ganesha.
His vehicle is a mouse, who has sharp teeth symbolizing the sharpness of
Ganapati’s intellect and discrimination, capable of cutting the fetters of

bondage and removing the obstacles.
GATASU. One whose PRANA has departed from the body. According to the
Bhagavad Gita, the departure of PRANA from the body never means the death
of the soul. Death and birth are habits of the body and the self. An individual
suffers on account of his or her attachment to the body-mind organism.
GUHYA. Secret or hidden. Advanced spiritual instruction is said to be secret
or hidden because it can be imparted only by a competent master to a
deserving student.
GUNAS. Attributes of nature. According to SAMKHYA philosophy, PRAKRITI,
the primordial nature, has three qualities: SATTVA, RAJAS, and TAMAS. SATTVA
signifies brightness and lightness; RAJAS indicates movement; while TAMAS
indicates heaviness, inertia, and darkness. For spiritual growth, SATTVA is
helpful and should be cultivated.
GURU. The popular term used for a spiritual master who reveals the path of
divinity to his students. GURUDEVA is the proper appellation for such a
teacher.
GURUDEVA. The term used for the spiritual teacher, indicating great reverence
and humility. Traditionally the term “guru” is not used by itself without
“deva.” Literally it means “the bright being who dispels the darkness of
ignorance.”
GURUKULA. The place where the GURU resides and imparts secular and
spiritual wisdom to his students. Literally, it means “the guru’s family.”
HANUMAN. A great warrior entirely devoted to Lord Rama. He was king of a
race that is described as resembling monkeys. His exploits are described in
the RAMAYANA.
HATHA YOGA. The yoga comprising the first five rungs of RAJA YOGA: YAMA,
NIYAMA, ASANA, PRANAYAMA, and PRATYAHARA.
IDA. The subtle energy channel on the left side of SUSHUMNA, opposite to
PINGALA on the right. See NADI.
INDRA. King of the gods. Entymologically, Indra means the master of the
senses. Indra is depicted as a student having an enormous amount of patience
and a burning desire to realize the Truth.
ISHVARA. The almighty God residing in everyone’s heart and directing all
human activities. The manifest Lord or personal deity.
JANMA. Birth. According to the Bhagavad Gita, birth simply means coming to
an external state of existence. The soul is exactly the same before and after
birth.

JAPA. Repetition of the MANTRA, whether verbal or silent.
JIGYASA. The desire to know. In a spiritual context, it means a burning desire
to learn and follow the path of BRAHMA VIDYA.
JITATMA. One who has conquered the appetite of the lower self.
JIVA. The individuated soul. Because of its association with MAYA or
PRAKRITI, the soul becomes subject to bondage and thus seeks liberation.
JIVA ATMA YAJNA. Internal yajna in which the individual self, or lower self,
offers itself to the higher Self, ATMAN.
JNANA. Knowledge of the Absolute. Here it means experiential knowledge
leading the individual to union with the Supreme.
JNANA NISHTHA. A firm commitment to follow the path of knowledge.
JNANA YAJNA. Wisdom sacrifice. The Bhagavad Gita offers various
interpretations of ritual or sacrifice and suggests the internalization of
external ritual by offering various attitudes and tendencies into the fire of
higher knowledge. For jnana yajna, the Bhagavad Gita suggests the offering
of the sense of duality and multiplicity into the fire of non-dual knowledge.
Thereby one attains freedom and immortality.
JNANA YOGA. The yoga of knowledge as expounded by VEDANTA.
JYOTI. Light.
KALA. The time principle. According to the Bhagavad Gita, good and bad,
construction and destruction, all occur within the range of time. Everything
originates and ultimately dissolves into the mouth of time. Here time is
identical with the supreme Reality.
KALPA. A measure of time; a day and night of Brahma. A set of four YUGAS is
called a MAHAYUGA. One thousand MAHAYUGAS constitute the period of
creation (one day of Brahma), and another thousand comprise the period of
dissolution (one night of Brahma). Two thousand such MAHAYUGAS are called
a kalpa, which is 8,652,000,000 years. See YUGA.
KAMA. Kama is the prime desire that gives birth to anger, greed, attachment,
jealousy, and pride.
KARIKA. A commentary in verse form. In this context it refers to the special
commentary written by Gaudapada on the Mandukya Upanishad.
KARMA. Action. According to yoga traditions, the karma that is performed
with any selfish motive brings about bondage, while performing the same
karma selflessly for the sake of duty alone brings freedom.
KARMA NISHTHA. A firm conviction to follow the path of action.
KARMA YOGA. The yoga of selfless and skillful action.

KAURAVAS. The sons of Kuru, led by DUROYODHANA, who fought against the
PANDAVAS, led by ARJUNA.
KHECHARI MUDRA. A yogic practice performed by stretching the tongue
behind the palate. This stimulates the ambrosial nectar (AMRITA) to drip from
the lambini CHAKRA, located near the pituitary or pineal glands, thus
rejuvenating the body.
KRIPA. Grace, favor. Grace is considered to be the direct cause of the highest
spiritual achievement.
KRISHNA. Sri Krishna represents the pure Self, the center of consciousness,
who instructs ARJUNA, the individual self.
KRISHNA. Darkness.
KRIYA. Washes and methods of purification. These include the upper wash,
lower wash, complete wash, and various internal kriyas, which are usually
combined with advanced techniques of PRANAYAMA.
KRODHA. Anger.
KSHARA. Perishable. One experiences two kinds of reality: the one that is
constantly changing (kshara) and the one that never changes, (AKSHARA).
KSHATRIYA. The warrior and governing class. The duties of warriors include
protecting and serving all of humanity.
KSHETRA. Field. Here field means the primordial nature (PRAKRITI) and all its
evolutes. Since nature is unconscious, it cannot know itself; its knower is the
conscious principle, PURUSHA.
KSHETRAJNA. Knower of the field; PURUSHA, the ever-illumined pure Self.
KUNDALINI. The divine energy, which ordinarily remains latent, sleeping at
the base of the spine. The goal of yoga is to awaken this force and lead it
upward to unite with supreme Consciousness, thus yielding unitary bliss.
KURUKSHETRA. The field on which everyone has to perform his actions. This
is also the name of a place with a profound historical, religious, and spiritual
significance, situated in modern Hiriyana not far from Delhi, where the battle
described in the Bhagavad Gita is said to have taken place.
KUSHA. A kind of grass with very sharp points. Kusha grass is considered to
be very holy and is traditionally used for rituals. It is woven into meditation
mats because it is a very poor conductor of energy. Thus the energy
accumulated in meditation is not dissipated through contact with the earth or
any other object.
LOBHA. Greed.
LOKA SANGRAHA. Actions performed only for the sake of others.

MAHABHARATA. A great Sanskrit epic containing 100,000 verses. Although it
describes the story of two great kings, it also contains vast knowledge on
subjects such as ethics, morality, social laws, philosophy, metaphysics, and
spirituality. This book is considered to be the inexhaustable source of Eastern
wisdom.
MAHATMA. A great soul. A spiritually evolved person who through his
wisdom has broken the limited boundary of ego and thus sees himself in all
beings.
MAHAYUGA. A set of four YUGAS; 4,326,000 years. See KALPA.
MANAS. Mind. According to VEDANTA it is one of the four functions of the
inner instruments, ANTAHKARANA. Manas is the sensory-motor mind,
characterized by indecision and doubtful thinking.
MANTRA. Divine seed syllables which, through constant repetition and
remembrance, lead students toward higher spiritual achievements.
MANUS. The law-givers. In the Indian tradition, it is believed that at the
beginning of each cycle of creation there is born such a seer of Truth who
makes laws for human beings of that period.
MAUNA. Silence.
MAYA. The power of BRAHMAN: the illusory force through which Reality
enacts the drama of illusory appearance and disappearance of the external
world as well as bondage and liberation. Maya has two functions: the power
to veil Reality and the power to project the unreal in place of the Real.
MOKSHA JNANA YAJNA. Internal sacrifice leading to the attainment of final
liberation.
MUKTA. A liberated one; one who is not in the bondage of pain because he
realizes his essential nature.
MUKTI. Liberation.
MULA PRAKRITI. “Mula” means root, “prakriti” means primordial nature.
Combined together this means “the root cause of the entire universe.”
MUNI. One who practices silence.
NADI. An energy channel. According to the yogic tradition, there are 72,000
nadis of which 14 are the important ones. Out of these fourteen, IDA, PINGALA,
and SUSHUMNA are the most important nadis, especially for spiritual
purposes.
NASA. Nose.
NASAGRE. At the front of the nose. Practically, it is the juncture at which the
nostrils are separated. See AGRA BHAGE.

NIDIDHYASANA. Pondering over the Truth and applying it in one’s daily life.
According to JNANA YOGA, one attains identity with supreme knowledge in
three successive stages: studying or listening to the teaching (SRAVANA),
thinking about and analyzing them (manana), and applying them practically
and assimilating them into one’s personality (nididhyasana).
NIRGUNA. Without attributes. In Indian philosophy, reality is said to have two
states: reality without attributes and reality with attributes. The former
remains uninvolved with worldly phenomena while the latter is the cause of
manifestation, preservation, and annihilation of the universe. See also
SAGUNA.
NISHTHA. Firm conviction or a well-thought-out and firm decision, free from
doubt. See JNANA NISHTHA and KARMA NISHTHA.
NITYA. Eternal; that which is not affected by the laws of time, space, and
causation and which remains unchanged and unaffected forever.
NIYAMA. Restraints; disciplinary guidelines for self-transformation and selfimprovement. This is the second rung of the eightfold path of RAJA YOGA. It
consists of purity, contentment, austerity, self-study, and dedication or
surrender to God.
OM TAT SAT. OM, that alone is real.
PANDAVAS. The five sons of Pandu, among whom Yuhdishthira was the
eldest. For the sake of righteousness and under the guidance of Lord
KRISHNA, they fought and defeated the KAURAVAS. ARJUNA was a Pandava.
PANDIT. A learned man. One who is well versed in the scriptures and who
follows the path of spirituality.
PARA. Beyond. Here it is used to indicate the knowledge of the Supreme,
which cannot be achieved through books and other methods of conventional
study and education.
PATANJALI. The codifier of the Yoga Sutras.
PINGALA. The subtle energy channel on the right side of SUSHUMNA, opposite
to IDA on the left. See NADI.
PRABHU. All-pervading and omnipresent. This is the title given to one who
has attained mastery over the senses and mind.
PRAJAPATI. The lord of all subjects; a term for the creator of the universe.
PRAKRITI. Primordial nature. According to the SAMKHYA and YOGA systems
of philosophy, there are two eternal realities: PURUSHA and Prakriti. PURUSHA
is the conscious principle, and Prakriti is the unconscious principle. PURUSHA
is the pure witness, the subject, consciousness. Prakriti is unconscious, the

object, the cause of all worldly phenomena. Through association with
PURUSHA, Prakriti becomes the enjoyer of pain, pleasure, and indifference.
The universe comes into existence when PURUSHA and Prakriti join each
other and apparently share each other’s qualities.
PRANA. The life force. In the yogic tradition the life force prana is said to be
tenfold, depending on its nature and function. Of the ten, prana and APANA are
the most important ones. Prana is ordinarily identified with inhalation and
APANA with exhalation. According to the Bhagavad Gita, a yogi should
balance and control the movement of prana and APANA in order to have
control over the modifications of the mind and thus attain SAMADHI.
PRANAVA. The eternal sound “OM.”
PRANAYAMA. Breath control; breathing exercise; the fourth rung of RAJA
YOGA.
PRATYAHARA. Withdrawal of the senses; the fifth rung of RAJA YOGA.
PURUSHA. The conscious principle; the pure Self. See PRAKRITI.
PURUSHOTTAMA. Best among all the PURUSHAS. This is an epithet given to
Lord KRISHNA.
RAGA. Attachment.
RAJA VIDYA. Royal knowledge; a well-defined spiritual path leading to the
highest goal of life.
RAJA YOGA. The royal path of yoga. The great sage PATANJALI codified the
system of raja yoga, which has eight successive stages: YAMA, NIYAMA, ASANA,
PRANAYAMA, PRATYAHARA, DHARANA, DHYANA, and SAMADHI. See ASTANGA
YOGA.
RAJAS. The GUNA of activity or motion. See GUNA.
RAMAYANA. The earliest epic in Sanskrit literature, attributed to the poet sage
Valmiki. It describes the life story of Lord Rama and all of his great works.
RATRI. Night, symbolizing the lunar energy.
SADHAKA. One who follows the spiritual path.
SADHANA. Spiritual practice.
SAGUNA. With attributes; the lower aspect of the Reality also known as
Iswara (God). This state of reality is endowed with MAYA and thus is the
cause of manifestation, preservation, and annihilation of the universe. See
NIRGUNA.
SAHASRARA. The thousand petaled lotus, the crown CHAKRA. In the yoga
tradition there are seven main centers of consciousness; among them,
sahasrara is the highest. Because of its anatomical location at the top of the

head it is called the crown center.
SAKAMA. Actions performed with certain motives.
SAKAMA UPASANA. Worship or meditation with motives.
SAKSHATKARA. Direct realization of Truth from within. In contrast to
perceptual, inferential, and any other kind of ordinary knowledge, it signifies
the inner, intuitive, spontaneous revelation of the Truth in its totality and
purity.
SAMADHI. Spiritual absorption; the eighth rung of RAJA YOGA. As long as a
yogi is aware of the process of meditation, the object of meditation, and the
meditator, such a state is called samadhi with seed. When the yogi merges
into unitary consciousness, such a state is called samadhi without seed.
SAMAHITA. A yogi whose mind is calm and tranquil and who is thus
established in the inner Self; the state in which all questions are answered.
SAMATVAM. The sense of equanimity. It is the characteristic of a yogi who is
ever established in knowledge. Such a yogi sees no difference between gold
and dirt, heat and cold, pain and pleasure, and so on.
SAMAVIDYA. Knowledge of meditation and devotion.
SAMKALPA. Firm resolve. Samkalpa means to decide to do something, and
VIKALPA means to remain doubtful about such decision.
SAMKALPA SHAKTI. The power of determination. In spiritual practice; this
power is the foundation of progress.
SAMKALPA VIKALPA ATMAKA. That which is characterized by indecision and
uncertainty. This is the definition of mind in Indian philosophy.
SAMKHYA. The system of Indian philosophy that posits the existence of two
realities, PURUSHA and PRAKRITI, the conscious and unconscious principles.
SAMSKARAS. Subtle impressions of past actions.
SAMYAMA. Discipline. In order to shake off laziness, inertia, and lack of
motivation, discipline is required. The main characteristic of discipline is the
purification and control of thought, speech, and action.
SANJAYA. The narrator of the Bhagavad Gita, who had the extraordinary
power to see and hear things happening at a distance. Because of this ability,
he was able to explain to King DHRITARASHTRA in his palace the events of the
war as well as the knowledge imparted by SRI KRISHNA to ARJUNA.
SANNYASA. Renunciation. See ASHRAMA and ESHANAS.
SANNYASIN. A renunciate, one who is not attached to any worldly things or to
the fruits of his actions.
SAT. That which is existent.

SATSANGA. Company of the sages.
SATTVA. The GUNA of light, brightness, and peace. See GUNA.
SATTVIKAS. Aspirants whose actions are performed selflessly with a motive to
serve others, those who are based in SATTVA GUNA.
SATYAM. Truth. Absolute Reality is supposed to be endowed with three
inherent properties: satyam, SHIVAM, and SUNDARAM.
SHAKTI. The primal force that resides within.
SHAKTI PATA. Spontaneous spiritual transformation resulting from divine
grace through the touch or gaze of a realized master.
SHANKARA. The great sage who founded the monastic order of yogis and
wrote commentaries on the principle UPANISHADS, the Bhagavad Gita, and the
Brahma Sutra, expounding the theory of non-dualism, ADVAITA VEDANTA.
SHANTI PARVA. The cantos of the MAHABHARATA in which the grandfather of
ARJUNA imparts the knowledge related to all aspects of life and society.
SHIVAM. Auspicious.
SHRADDHA. Faith. Faith is a divine quality and an essential aspect of one’s
spiritual practice. Such faith does not rely on the knowledge of the scriptures;
rather it comes through spontaneous experience from within.
SHUDRA. The working class of society.
SHUKLA. White, symbolizing the bright aspect of the personality; the solar
energy.
SIDDHASANA. The accomplished posture, recommended by yogis as a
meditation pose for sincere students.
SOMA. A specific species of plant or the juice extracted from it. In ancient
times there were sacrifices in which the juice from the soma plant was
offered into a ritual fire with the desire to achieve mundane goals or heaven.
SHRAVANA. Listening to teachings and studying the scriptures, the first step in
the path of JNANA YOGA, the yoga of knowledge. VEDANTA and JNANA YOGA
describe spiritual practice in three successive stages: listening to teachings
and studying the scriptures (sravana); pondering and contemplating the truths
explained in the scriptures (manana); and practicing those truths in daily life
(NIDIDHYASANA).
SRI. A title of respect.
STHITA PRAJNA. Steady insight. One whose wisdom is established in his inner
Self. The Bhagavad Gita explains the nature and behavior of such evolved
spiritual souls in great detail.
SUKHASANA. The comfortable posture, a pose prescribed for meditation.

SUKTA VIDYA. The knowledge of good utterances and thoughts.
SUNDARAM. Beauty.
SUSHUMNA. The central NADI, the inner channel corresponding to the spinal
column. This NADI has profound significance in yogic practices, especially in
the practice of KUNDALINI yoga. Only competent masters know how to open
sushumna and direct the dormant divine force KUNDALINI through it, leading it
to SAHASRARA, the thousand petalled center. When the breath flows freely and
equally through both nostrils, SUSHUMNA is engaged.
SUYATE. To bring forth or bring about prosperity. In the Bhagavad Gita SRI
KRISHNA says, “Under My direction PRAKRITI brings forth all animate and
inanimate existence.
SVABHAVA PRAKRITI. One’s own habitual tendencies that have become
inseparable from his personality. These innate tendencies cause certain
SAMSKARAS to become conscious and cloud the conscious part of the mind,
forcing an individual to desire and become involved in certain actions.
SWAMI. A yogi who is the master of his senses and mind. It is also the title
usually given to any of the monks of the Shankaracharya order. It can also
refer to God, since He is the Master of all.
TAMAS. The GUNA of inertia, heaviness, and darkness. See GUNA.
TATSAT. “That is real;” Truth; that Reality which is beyond time, space, and
causation, and which cannot be grasped by speech and mind.
TRATAKA. Gazing on external objects. It is a complete science in itself. An
experienced yogi can prescribe the proper object and specific method of
gazing for attaining concentration and one-pointedness of mind or for
improving the eyesight.
TURIYA. The state beyond the waking, dreaming, and deep sleep states. This
state is the essential nature of the Self, in which the Self is established in its
pure existence, consciousness, and bliss.
TYAGA. Giving up possessions. It is one of the two essential requirements of
the path of renunciation. Under the law of tyaga one gives up all that he
possesses and enjoys the freedom that comes from non-possessiveness.
Under the other requirement, non-attachment (VAIRAGYA), the basic
necessities that cannot be given up have to be used without attachment.
UPANISHADS. The end of the VEDAS. Texts that should be studied while sitting
at the feet of the teacher. The Upanishads are the books of wisdom endowed
with profound philosophical and practical instruction. Of the more than 200
Upanishads, 10 are of major importance. The Upanishads are the foundation

of VEDANTA philosophy.
VAIRAGYA. Dispassion or non-attachment. According to the Bhagavad Gita
one does not necessarily need to renounce the world or what one needs, but
one should perform his duties lovingly, skillfully, and selflessly, remaining
unattached to the fruits of his actions.
VAISHYA. The business class and landowners.
VAK SHAKTI. The power of speech.
VASANA. Subtle traces of one’s thoughts and actions.
VAYU. Air or wind. Here it is used in the sense of the life force, represented
by breath.
VEDANTA. The system of Indian philosophy that expounds the theory of nondualism, ADVAITA.
VEDAS. The sourcebook of knowledge. Veda is revealed wisdom,
experienced by the great sages in deep meditation. For many centuries the
sages imparted the knowledge of the Vedas orally to their close disciples.
Finally the great sage VYASA, on the basis of topic and practical application,
organized the Vedas into four classes and commited them to writing. These
four sections are now known as Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda, and
Atharva Veda. The UPANISHADS are the last portions of these four books of
the Vedas.
VIBHUTI. The glorious manifestation of God, or the extraordinary powers of
the Lord.
VIJNANA. Special or higher knowledge. In contrast to ordinary knowledge of
mundane awareness, it refers to spiritual wisdom.
VIJNANA YAJNA. Wisdom sacrifice. In contrast to external rituals and
offerings, it signifies internal rituals in which knowledge of duality is offered
into the fire of nondual unitary knowledge.
VIKALPA. A state of mind that is unsettled, confused, and doubtful.
VIKARMA. Action that is opposed to right action.
VISHADA. Dejection.
VISHNU. The all-pervading One. Vishnu is one of the gods of the Hindu
pantheon. His main characteristic is to maintain and preserve the universe. Sri
KRISHNA is one of the incarnations of Vishnu.
VYAKTA. The manifest aspect of nature. See AVYAKTA.
VYASA. A great sage of Indian spiritual lore. The Bhagavad Gita, the whole
MAHABHARATA, and many of the other epics are attributed to Vyasa.
According to tradition he was a yogi of extraordinary abilities.

YAJNA. Sacrifice or ritualistic ceremony. In the Bhagavad Gita, it refers to the
act that helps an individual to maintain harmony within his individual, social,
and cosmic life. Depending on the nature and the goal, there are various kinds
of yajnas. These can be categorized in two main classes: the external and the
internal.
YAJUR VIDYA. Knowledge of sacrificial acts.
YAMA. Observances. This is the first rung of RAJA YOGA, consisting of nonviolence, truthfulness, non-stealing, non-indulgence, and non-possessiveness.
YOGA. The system of Indian philosophy systematized and codified by the
sage Patanjali. It also refers to the practical aspect of any philosophy,
particularly SAMKHYA. Literally it means “yoke,” referring to the uniting of
the individual self and the universal Self.
YOGA NIDRA. Yogic sleep. Instead of going through the ordinary dreaming
and sleeping states, advanced yogis provide complete rest to their bodies and
minds by applying the technique of yoga nidra. It is a complete, scientific
method described in yogic texts.
YOGA SADHANA. The practice of yoga.
YOGI. One who practices yoga.
YUGA. Aeon. In the Indian calendar, human civilization is hallmarked by four
different stages of growth, called yugas. Although astronomers have given
definite time spans for each yuga, these calculations differ considerably, but a
yuga encompasses at least several thousand years. A set of four yugas is
called a MAHAYUGA, which consists of 4,326,000 years. Two thousand
MAHAYUGAS constitute a KALPA. Three hundred and sixty KALPAS make one
year of BRAHMA, who lives for one hundred such years.







